# A HOARD OF UNPUBLISHED SILVER COINS FROM THE BALUCHISTAN/SIND

# BORDER, CA.LATE 7'"-EARLY 874

# CENTURY Ap

## By Alexander Fishman

I recently encountered a large group of silver coins, reportedly found on the Baluchistan/Sindh border in Pakistan. These coins

have been known in the West since the middle of the twentieth

century, but it seems that they have not yet been properly published or studied.

Fig, 1: Examples of uncleaned coins of the "4-dots" type, exhibiting lead-like patina

These coins are unpublished, and do not seem to appear in the

standard catalogues or publications. They are uniface, with four

prominent large dots. two or three Brahmi letters and other devices on the obverse and a blank reverse, sometimes showing

slight incuse impressions of the four dots due to die-clashing.

The examples that sometimes appear on auction websites or

other public sales are usually vaguely labelled as having Pakistani

provenance, with very little additional information provided.

Finding related issues might give a hint as to the origin of

these coins. The coins lack any normal Hunnic elements and do

not feature Arabic inscriptions, suggesting that they are neither

Hunnic nor Islamic in origin. Stylistically, the coins are certainly

related to very late pre-Islamic coins from Multan (Figure 2), which date to the late 7" century AD or very early 8" century AD

and which were in turn derived from the altar-type drachms of the

Gupta King, Skandagupta, and perhaps various local issues.

## Fig. 2: ARI4 of the last Hindu rulers of Multan (late 7"-early للق‎ century AD)

These Multan coins carry a mysterious Brahmi inscription Sri/PaRa/Ku-Ta and cannot be attributed to any known ruler. However,

the reverse design, which exhibits a fire altar represented as three

prominent large dots topped by a wide and somewhat stylised Brahmi aksara Sri, was clearly an inspiration for the design (Fig.

3, p.14, below) on the coins discussed in this article. The large

central dot design remained mostly unchanged and the aksara Sri

was modified into a series of vertical lines. The base of the fire

altar disappeared altogether and the old Brahmi inscription was replaced with a new one.

These coins are common and are found in a wide area in

Pakistan and North-Western India. The exact find spots of these

coins are not easy to determine. I could find no published

archaeological or numismatic records of their find spots, so my knowledge of the provenance of these coins comes from my conversation with Pakistani and Indian dealers and numismatists

and is based on largely anecdotal evidence. The coins are

reportedly found in single numbers as far south as Malwa and Rajasthan in India, though the most common area where these coins are found is the northern border of Sindh with the Baluchistan provinces of Pakistan (Maps 1-2).

Map \|: Modern location of Sindh, Multan and Jhal Magsi

# INDIA

# 1-MULTAN

# 2 - JHAL MAGSI

Map 2: Approximate ancient map of the region, ca.700 AD

# ISLAMIC

# CALIPHATE CHACHES

# OF SINDH

# ARABIAN SEA ey "nt is + MULTAN ' te \* JHAL MAsSI ا‎

In the 7" century this area covering Pakistan and the entire

Western and Northern India was in the crossroads between

various powers and was a complicated patchwork of vassal and

independent states ruled by various Hunnic tribes, Gurjuras,

Pratiharas and native Hindus. The Sindh/Baluchistan border area

was at that time part of a powerful Hindu Kingdom of the Rai

dynasty, who were probably of Gurjura origin, which controlled

the Sindh and Multan region (ca. AD 478 to 632), and later by the

Chach dynasty (ca. AD 632-712). Sindh was bordered in the north by the Hindus of Zabul and in the west by the former provinces of

the Persian Empire, which had been conquered by the Arabs in AD 642-644 to form part of the expanding Islamic Caliphate.

The coins discussed in this article cannot currently be

attributed to an exact town or kingdom, though this may change if

more hoards of these coins are discovered and properly documented. However it is possible that the coins were issued by

a short-lived buffer kingdom located around Gandawah in Jhal Magsi district of Pakistan.

The district is named after the town of Jhal, seat of the Magsi tribe. The district is divided into two regions: Gandawah and Jhal Magsi. Gandawah is a historical and ancient town in Baluchistan.

Its oldest name was Kandabil, which was renamed to ""Gangaba" during Arab rule. It is possible that the coins discussed in this

article were issued in this area shortly before or after the Islamic

conquest of the area in AD 712. The circumstances under which

the coins were minted - perhaps a Hindu Kingdom in the area was established as a sort of a buffer state to protect Multan from the Arabs, or an ephemeral Hindu kingdom appeared in the area after

the fall of Sindh and Multan. Further studies of the history and numismatics of the area might provide more answers.
These coins are often believed to be made of lead, possibly

because the original patina on many of the coins is brown-grey (fig. 1, above), much like the patina found on lead objects. However, the patina can be easily removed revealing the silver. XRay Fluorescence (XRF) analysis has shown that the silver

content of the coins is about 85%, with the main contaminant being copper at 13% and with trace amounts of gold, lead and arsenic.

Interestingly, the manufacturing method employed in the

productions of these coins is, according to my knowledge, unique within the area of oriental numismatics. I am not sure how these flans were prepared - perhaps they were cast, or perhaps the flans were struck with cast dies. One unusual physical feature remains consistent: the size of the obverse is always somewhat smaller

than the reverse. The coins appear almost as though they have

been fashioned from two thin halves, glued together. This unusual

appearance has led some numismatists, notably Dr. S. Bhandare,

to believe that these pieces are not coins at all, but some sort of artefacts fulfilling some other ritual function.

The obverse design is most puzzling - it is sometimes called a "stylized face" or a "stylized horse", but most often a "4-dots

design" (as opposed to the somewhat similar "3-dot design"

featured on pre-Islamic Multan coins and depicted in fig. 2, above). However, the four large dots that are clear on most coins

do not constitute the entire obverse design - most of these coins

are struck with oversized dies, and the entire design cannot be

made out on a single specimen. Upon closer examination of

multiple specimens, it is possible to reconstruct the entire design of the die. It is easy to see the full design is more complex than just four dots (fig. 3).

Fig. 3: Two types of the obverse design found on these coins Type A Type B

The four large dots are flanked with a pair of smaller dots (one on

each side) and each of the five upper dots is topped with a rounded line or a bar.

I have observed two major types - one (by far, the most

common one) with two of the upper dots connected to the lower

one with lines (fig. 3, type A), and the other with all the dots

unconnected (fig. 3, type B). If this design was indeed inspired by

the Multan coins as explained above, the original meaning of a Gupta- or Sasanian-style altar was completely lost and the design simply devolved into a series of dots and lines.

Although many of the coins exhibit signs of die-rusting,

suggesting a lengthy period of use, they were all manufactured in

the same manner, in a very similar style and apparently using the

same manufacturing method. It, thus, seems likely that they were

all produced within a relatively short period of time. All coins

examined carried a legible Brahmi inscription placed below the

dotted obverse design. The inscription should be read from left to

right. In total, I identified ten different inscriptions, eight (or

possibly nine) of them composed of two aksara and a single type

composed of three aksara, and one possible type where the aksara

were either illegible or replaced with a pair of symbols. The

inscriptions were neatly and carefully engraved - styles of at least

two or three different engravers can be easily discerned. It seems

certain that the Brahmi inscription was supposed to carry a

meaning of some sort, but the meaning of the inscriptions might

be permanently lost - the words are not complete and do not

clearly signify anything. They might be initials of the ruler, but it

seems unlikely that the coins were produced during a period long

enough to cover ten different rulers. The inscriptions might be the initials of the moneyers or some sort of control marks, placed to

keep track of different coin issues or workshops. Interestingly,

eight of the types had Ha as the first aksdra so this letter probably carries some unknown significance.

The hoard itself was quite large, containing at least a few

thousand coins (the exact count is unknown). The entire hoard

was not available for examination, but a random sample of 254

coins was examined. Eleven varieties with a total of ten different

inscriptions were identified. Not all types were present in equal

numbers - some coins were much rarer than others, with a single

type (9A) constituting about 65% of the hoard. The weight of the coins ranged from 0.85 to 1.45 grams, though the extremely light

and extremely heavy examples were rare, and most of the coins

weighed between 1.15 and 1.25 grams. The size was remarkably

constant, averaging about 16 mm. The hoard composition is presented in figure 4. Figure 4: Hoard composition. Ave. " Number Type# \> Brahmi Weight SHErange or coins % of inscription (mm) total (g) examined

1A HaCha 1.25 14-19 4.3% 2A MaHaM Laz 15-17 5.1% 2B HaMaM 1.14 15-17 1.6% 3A HaMaVa 1.24 14-16 1.2% 4A HaVa 1.23 15-17 5.5% 5A HaKa 1.26 15-18 5.1%

6A HaTha 1.22 15-16 2.0% 7A HaSi 1.18 15-18 6.7% 8A HaPi 1.24 15-17 35% 9A HaGu LZ\} 14-19 64.6% Uncertain 10A (symbols?) 1.22 0.39% Total: Weight ranges of the examined coins Fa $$ = $$ $$ = $$

## 20 جام‎

» ar » x" 7 في"‎ 5 د‎ SM ا اد‎ SY YY Oe NS NY + ne NS NG Coin weights (grams)

All the different varieties of the examined coins are shown below: Type 1A: "HaCha"

## The writing of the akséra Ha is as expected for 6"-7" century

North-Eastern India, but the writing of Cha is somewhat unusual.

The expected form from the North-Western India/Sindh area

## in this time period would probably be do. db. od or, though numerous various of this aksdra exist. The addition of the wide top bar is not common, but is consistent with the writing style of the die cutter, who put such a bar on aksara on

many of the types described here. Though uncommon, this

particular spelling of Cha is known from Nasik in Western Maharashtra and Vadodara inscriptions in Gujarat. --- Type 2A: "HaMaM"

# aS

Again, the writing of the aksdra Ha appears as expected for the 7"

century. The aksara Ma is clear, though this aksara can be spelled

in numerous different ways (for example, the appearance of this Ma is quite different from its appearance on type 3A below). Above Ma there is an anusvara (terminal "m"). The anusvara

usually takes the shape of a thick dot (sometimes. slightly

elongated) above and to the slightly to the right of the aksara and

## this is the shape of MaM that would be expected: 1 However,

## it is noted that at Mathura it is common for the anusvara to

become a short line above the character instead of a dot.' It seems

that this spelling was used by the engraver of this type as well. In view of the apparent affection of the die cutter of these coins for horizontal bars, this is not unexpected. Type 2B: "HaMaM"

This type is identical to the previous type, except that the dotted

pattern on obverse is of type B (with the lower dot not connected

to the flanking large two dots above). This is the only type with

this dot design, but it is surprisingly common - about a quarter of the HaMaM coins were of this type.

On some of these coins (and of type 2A) a feature that looks like

an additional dot (?) below Ha can be discerned, but it is probably just an artefact of the minting process and is not a part of the

inscription. I am indebted to Dr Harry Falk for his assistance with this reading. Type 3A: "HaMaVa"

Coins of this type are the only coins showing three aksara instead ot two. The inscription begins in the left central field, and not in

the lower field, like all other coins of this type.

Again, the writing of the aksara Ha is as expected for the 7"

century. The aksara Ma is clear, though this aksara can be spelled

Dani, A.H. Indian Palaeography, p.89, Munisharam Manoharlal (1986)

in numerous different ways (for example, the appearance of this Ma is quite different from its appearance on type 2 above). The

rounded form of Ma, such as on this coin, was less common than

## the "triangular" form 2 but it is still encountered on various

inscriptions in Gujarat and Maharashtra. Again, the tendency of

the die cutter to add bars to the top parts of the aksara makes the reading somewhat confusing, but Ma is still the only possible reading in this case.

The last aksara is certainly Va, though the spelling shown on

this coin does look a bit like a Cha, Ca or Dha. Similar spellings of Va are found all over India of this time period and are common. Type 4A: "HaVa"

This type is identical to type 3A above, but with the middle aksara

omitted and the legend arranged the normal way, with the aksara Ha being in the lower central field. On a single examined specimen, Va appears angular: X. Both the angular and the

rounded depictions are not uncommon and are encountered in contemporary inscriptions from all over India. Some coins of type 6A can sometimes be misread as this type. Type 5A: "Haka" Joa

Again, the writing of the aksara Ha is as expected for the 7"

century. The aksara Ka is clear and neatly engraved as well. Type 6A: "Ha Tha" ب

Only five of the examined coins were of this interesting type, where the writing of the aksara Ha is as expected for the 6"-7" centuries but the second aksara is puzzling. It could potentially be

interpreted as an unusual rendering of Cha or possibly even Va,

but the completely rounded form indicates that the aksara was

intended to be either Tha or Tha. The normal depiction of this

## aksara is somewhat different - © for Tha and 0 for Tha.

Addition of a vertical bar capped with a horizontal bar is

unexpected, though it might be in line with the engraver's

tendency to add the "horizontal bar" clement to the aksara. There is not enough information in the available specimens to state with complete certainty if a dot is present within the second aksara. It

seems that it is not present, in which case the reading of the inscription should be HaTha. However, the distinction between

the 7ha on this type and Va on type 4A is often unclear, and a few coins can be read in either way.
## Type 7A: "HaSi"

Again, the writing of the aksara Ha is as expected for the 7" century. The relatively uncommon aksara Si is very carefully

engraved and is easily readable, though "7" is more elongated and curved than usual.

Again, the writing of the aksdra Ha is as expected for the 7" century. The relatively uncommon aksara Pi is very carefully engraved and has the expected shape. Type 9A: "HaGu"

This type is by far the most common - the bulk (about 65 per cent) of the examined coins in the hoard were of this type. Again, the writing of the aksara Ha is as expected for the 7" century. The aksara Gu is very carefully engraved and has the expected shape. Type 104: Uncertain ("Ka", "VaKa" or "EKa"'?)

# AF

This type was represented by a single coin in the hoard and the

reading on this coin is uncertain. Unlike on all other types examined, the first aksara was not Ha. It was also not located in

the lower central field, but in the left field.

The meaning of the first aksara is not clear. Such an aksara is

not known - it may in fact be a depiction of a triskeles and not a

part of the inscription at all. It is also possible that it is a modified

## aksara E which appears as: A. or Va which usually looks

## like a triangle, often slightly tilted to the left: A or BS Longer

strokes while engraving the triangles could give the triskeles-like form seen on this coin.

The aksara Se is sometimes given a shape that looks almost

## like a triskeles (though without the triangular center) - نم‎

It is possible that this aksara was intended but not successfully engraved.

The second aksara probably represents Ka, though such angular form would be unusual (compare with type 5A, where Ka is carefully and correctly engraved).

1 want to express my gratitude to R. Danziger for bringing these coins to my attention, W. Pieper, H. Falk and S. Bhandare for

their generous and valuable assistance in preparation of this paper and S. Yazdanian for editing it.

# THE UMAYYAD FULUS MINTED IN THE

# NAME OF MARWAN B. MUHAMMAD

# (THE DEAF) IN GEORGIA AND ELSEWHERE IN SOUTH CAUCASUS By Irakli Paghava and Severian Turkia

Our objective is to amend the attribution of the Kufic fals bearing the mint name Tiflis that we published recently', as well as to review the fulis minted in the name of Marwan b. Muhammad in Georgia and the South Caucasus region.

The following four coins bearing the name of Marwan b. Muhammad constitute the material that this work is based on:

1. Tiflis Kufic fals published by the authors in 2007 (Fig. 1);

2.  Tiflis Kufic fals of the same type from the collection of the Research Center for Islamic Numismatics of the Tiibingen University (Fig. 2):

3.  Kufic fals with no apparent mint place indicated but dated

AH 125 (Fig. 3( 4.  Al-Bab Kufic Fals dated Au 115 from a private collection in the Russian Federation (no image available)'.

Coin 1; A:, weight after mechanical cleaning: 1.48 g; diameter: 17-17.5 mm; die axis: 6 o'clock.

Obverse: The central legend in 2 lines in a circle:

## aly

# الا هللا"‎ The marginal legend:

# بسم الله ضرب هذا لفلاس بتفليس

Reverse: The central legend in 3 lines in a circle:

# محمد‎ رسول‎

# الله‎ The marginal legend: The words ضرب‎ seem to be omitted.

The graphemes making the personal name as well as the

patronymic of the emir on this coin are visible despite some

degradation of the coin surface, but their unambiguous

interpretation was not easy. When publishing the coin for the first time we refrained from reading the ism (the personal name), while

seeing and reading the nasab (the patronymic) as Ahmad:'(احمد)‎

we erroneously conjectured that that could be some new, previously unknown emir ruling in Tiflis or, alternatively, in the whole region®. After publishing our initial short paper, Mr Vadim Kalinin kindly corrected our reading, suggesting that the nasab
## was Muhammad (ase), and, having re-examined that section of

the coin, we agreed with him - the initial grapheme, though not

clear, did read more like mim (¢) than "alif (1). As to the ism, Mr. - Kalinin suggested it was Marwan (9)"°, the option which

we had been considering, but had rejected due to the ambiguity/corrosion of the last but one grapheme and the fact that

in our opinion the last grapheme looked more like lam (J), rather than nin.(ن)‎

When working on the initial paper we were aware of another Tiflis fals published in 5. Shamma's book on the Abbasid copper

coinage. No image had been provided, but the coin had been

described as Umayyad, in the name of the Caliph Marwan II b. Muhammad!'. The coin is preserved in the numismatic collection of the Research Centre for Islamic Numismatics of Tiibingen University', but was inaccessible for study to us at that time. Since then we have obtained its image (though unfortunately not a very good one). This coin is as follows:

Coin 2: A, weight: 1.68 g; diameter: 18 mm; die axis: not available. Obverse: The central legend in 2 lines in a circle:

## ayy الله‎ YI The marginal legend:

# بسم الله ضرب هذا سلفلا بتفليس‎

The obverse is quite similar to the obverse of Coin and may

even be a die match (having only the relatively low quality image of Coin 2 we cannot be sure).

Reverse: The central legend in 3 lines enclosed by a circle:

# محمد‎ رسول‎

# الله‎ The marginal legend:

The die seems to be different from the reverse die employed for

striking Coin 1. The words ضرب‎ seem to be omitted here as well.

The ism is clearer on this Tiflis coin, being Marwan TT

undoubtedly, and the similarity of the design, legends and their distribution, the calligraphy, even the probable matching of the

obverse dies, all indicate that these are two specimens of the same

issue. Therefore, it seems that the issuer was Marwan b. Muhammad.

It would be logical to presume that this Marwan b. Muhammad was the Umayyad Caliph Marwan II to be, who ruled

in the northern provinces of the caliphate before becoming Caliph. Marwan b. Muhammad was sent to the South Caucasus in AH 114 (732/3), where he strengthened Arab sway over the territory,

fought against the local political subjects, attacked Khazars

crossing the Caucasus via the Darial and Derbend passes and even

deported one of the Khazar tribes to eastern Georgia. According to

Georgian sources, Marwan b. Muhammad invaded western

Georgia, seizing many fortresses before being defeated in

Abkhazeti (Abkhazia), the remote north-western province of Georgia. For his ruthlessness and presumably ignorance of calls

for quarter, Marwan b. Muhammad even acquired the nickname q'ru, meaning the Deaf in Georgian'\*. By 744 (AH 126/7) he had become the Caliph (the last Umayyad caliph)'\>.

The identity of Marwan b. Muhammad acknowledged on the Tiflis fulis with Marwan b. Muhammad, the ruler of the northern provinces of the caliphate in AH 114-126/7, the Caliph-to-be (as suggested first by 5. Shamma'®) is supported by the existence of

coins bearing both the name Marwan b. Muhammad, as well as

the date relevant to the time period when the Caliph-to-be ruled in the South Caucasus.

We managed to find one coin like this in the Zeno Oriental Coins Database''. The coin seemingly has no mint place indicated, but bears the date \[AH\] 125'\*. This coin is as follows:

Coin 3: A, weight: 2.2 g; diameter: 20 mm; die axis: not available.

Obverse: The central legend in 3 lines in a circle:

## laly

## لا الله‎ وحده‎ The marginal legend:

# /( هللا مسب )؟برض هذا سلفلا )؟( سنة خمس و نيرشع مائة‎

The major part of the marginal legend is effaced, except for the

date which is virtually complete. Additionally, ذا‎ seems to be

legible, in our opinion constituting the fragment of:هذا‎ and also

an \| to the left from it; taking into account that \| and the limited

extension of the illegible parts of the marginal legend to the right

and to the left from,هذا‎ we interpret the effaced fragment to the

left from هذا‎ as:الفلس‎ as to the fragment to the right, we incline to consider it to be بسم الله‎ and not.ضرب‎

Reverse: The central legend in 3 lines in a square:

# محمد‎ "رسول‎

# الله‎

The marginal legend in 4 external segments, starting from the top of the left segment, anticlockwise:

## مما امر / به مالار / مرون بن / محمد

The expressions like هذا سلفلا‎ or برض‎ are omitted. The last

grapheme of the emir's ism (ن)‎ is quite elongated vertically, resembling a lam (ل)‎ in this case as well.

It is quite noteworthy, that there apparently exists at least one

more fals of Marwan b. Muhammad bearing the date \[AH\] 115 and

the mint name Al-Bab; the ism and nasab, the date, and the mint

place, all three point to the Caliph-to-be. The information was provided to us by Mr Kalinin. Although the image is not available for study, the testimony of this reputed researcher and expert on Kufic coinage makes the existence of such a coin virtually indisputable for us.

Theoretically one may still surmise that the Marwan b.

Muhammad acknowledged on the Tiflis fultis was not the Caliphto-be, but some other, yet unknown historical person'', but this is
highly improbable in our opinion, and these coins should be considered as late Umayyad fuliis"'.

These Tiflis copper coins bear no date, but now, with the identity of the emir revealed with sufficient, as we think, credibility, we could more or less safely attribute them to the 12-

13 year period of AH 114-126/7 (732/3-744). The other two fulus

that bear his name and the title Emir are dated \[AH\] 115 and 125 (correspondingly 733/4 and 742/3). According to the data at our disposal it as though Marwan b. Muhammad started issuing copper coinage in his name almost immediately after arriving in

the region and continued doing so at least till the end of his stay there.

In conclusion, one may reiterate that, based on the analysed material, the monetary issues in Tiflis, the centre of the Arab dominions in Georgia, were not limited to silver (and probably gold too)\*!, but included a copper coinage, namely the fulis as well. The latter bore no date but were minted in the period AH

114-126/7 (732/3-744), in the time of Marwan b. Muhammad, i.e. Murvan the Deaf, as he was referred to in Georgia, the Umayyad ruler of the northern provinces of the caliphate, who later became

the Caliph. The fuliis bore his name (the ism and the nasab) as well. This sheds light on the political, administrative and economic status of Tiflis, and will serve for further research into the economic history of Georgia and the rest of the region.

In addition to their significance for the monetary history of the region, the four Umayyad fultis described and presented above

attest to the political situation in the South Caucasus in AH 114-

126/7 (732/3-744), and to the monetary policy of the caliphate authorities. The appearance of the name of the new and vigorous provincial governor on the copper coins issued locally seems to be significant. These fulis throw some more light on Marwan b. Muhammad's activities in the South Caucasus. References: 1.  Turkia 2007.

2. غ1‎ first appeared in summer of 2006 and was found in the Mtkvari

(Kura) riverbed, in the territory of the Ortachala district of Tbilisi;

the coin was preserved in a private collection in Georgia (Ibid).

3.  Forschungsstelle fiir Islamische Numismatik der Universitat Tiibingen, AM10B3 (Shamma:233; personal communication from Dr Lutz Ilisch); We would like to take this opportunity to express our profound gratitude to Dr Lutz Ilisch (Tiibingen) for his support of

this research. 4.  Zeno: #51349, <<http://www.zeno.ru/showphoto.php>?photo=51349>. From a private collection in the Republic of Armenia?

5.  Personal communication from Mr Vadim Kalinin.

6.  The effaced fragments of the Arabic text reconstructed by us are indicated by underlining.

7.  Turkia 2007:6-7. The drawing produced (/bid.:7, Fig. 2) reflected our incorrect interpretation of the nasab. 8.  Ibid.:7.

9.  Personal communication from Mr Vadim Kalinin. We are very indebted to Mr Vadim Kalinin for generously sharing his expertise. 10.  Ibid. 11.  Shamma:233.

12.  Forschungsstelle fiir Islamische Numismatik der Universitat Tubingen, AM10B3 (Shamma:233).

13.  The name Marwan on this coin was first read by S. Album, whereas - Ilisch attributed it later as "Umayyad, Marwan ibn Muhammad" (Personal communication from Dr Lutz llisch). 14.  Javakhishvili:78-80. 15.  Ibid. 16.  Shamma:233.

17.  Zeno. By July 25, 2009 the database contained the entries for 699 Umayyad and 241 Abbasid fultis (/bid.).

18.  Ibid.: #51349, <<http://www.zeno.ru/showphoto.php>?photo=51349>.

19.  The central obverse legends on the Tiflis fuliis resemble those on the Barda'a AH 142 and 143 (759/60 and 760/1) fuliis (Mushegyan:64, ##23-24, plate 6, ##59-60), although the latter have different

marginal legends. This typological similarity made us erroneously conjecture in our earlier work that the Tiflis fuliis of this type could had been minted in the 750s or 760s (Turkia 2007:7), i.e. in the postMarwan b. Muhammad period.

20.  In our earlier work we were inclined to consider the copper coins of

this type to constitute Abbasid fultis, perhaps early ones (/bid.).

21.  We summarised recent scholarship on the Tiflis Umayyad and Abbasid issues in our earlier works (cf. Turkia 2007:7; Turkia 2008:6, footnote 12).

# THE FIRST KNOWN COIN OF

# MA'MUN 11 B. MA'MUNI, KHWARIZMSHAH MA'MUNID

## by Vadim Kalinin (Moscow)

The history of Khwarizm in the 10" century and beginning of the 1 century AD is still very scantily known from coins. The same is true of the coinage of the Ma'minids of Gurganj, who ruled in Khwarizm from AH 385/ AD 995. Four sultans of this dynasty are known:!

1. Abi "Ali Ma'miin I b. Muhammad (AH 385-387/ AD 995- 997),

2. Abii' l-Hasan 'Ali b. Ma'miin I (AH 387-399/ AD 997-1009), 3. Abi' l-"Abbas Ma'miin II b. Ma'miin I (AH 399-407/ aD 1009-1017),

4. Abi' l-Harith Muhammad b. 'Ali (AH 407--408/ aD 1017).

In the time of Muhammad b. 'Ali the whole of Khwarizm was conquered by Mahmid -  Sebuktegin Ghaznavid. This

understanding of the Ma'mitnids was altered recently by the publication of the coins of Mahmiid's hajib, Altuntash."

Among the Ma' miinids only the coins of "Ali b. Ma'miin were

known. These coins, are known from the mints of Khwarizm, Kath, Jurjaniyya, Faravah, Nisa' and Bukhara.\* Published below

is a coin found amongst a group of Islamic coins, acquired in Turkmenistan at the end of the 1980s and kept in a private collection in Novgorod (Russia). The coin is made of billon, weight 7.1g, size 35x33 mm. Obverse: inscription in the plain circle

# لا اله الا الله

# عهده الغالب للابه

# قو

lanigraM  dnegel fo eht esrevbo  si yllaitrap:‏elbisiv

# bo \]...‏llap ىف نيدمة خوارزم سنة خمس...

Reverse: inscription in the double plain circle:

## \[ol\]

# محمد رسول الله‎

# عين قنيزو.ةلودلا‎

# ةلملا سابعلاوبا‎

# خوارزم

lanigraM  dnegel fo esrever si  yllaitrap  elbisiv  dna si  a  tnemgarf ‏fo sharits 92:84 dna  33:9  fo eht:‏na'ruQ

#...‏gaG ىلع هرهظيل قحا نيدو.نيدلا..

The date on the coin is unclear - the hundreds are invisible, and only 'five' can be read clearly, which dates the coin to AH \[40\]5. According to the inscription, the coin was struck in the reign of Ma'min II b. Ma'miin I (AH 399-407) in Madinat, Khwarizm, in

AH 405. The /agab used on the coin - "Ayn al-Dawla wa Zayn alMilla (eye of the state and beauty of the Muslim commune) was received by Ma' mii II from caliph al-Qadir°.