son, Isma'il, was not as successful and he lost Mosul to the Mongols shortly after assuming power.

Acknowledgements Thanks go to Zaid Mohammed Ali for working on and arranging the

images in the acceptable format, to Robert Bracey for editing the article

and as always to Stan Goron for making the final editing contributions References:

1. Al-Riyashdi, Swadi A.M., The Reign of Badr Al-Din Li'l' in Mosul, al-Irshad press, Baghdad 1971 (in Arabic).

2. Kazan, William, Islamic Coin Collection, Beirut 1983.

3. Hennequin, Giles, Catalog des Monnaies Musulmanes/ les Salguks et Leurs Successeurs/Biblothiotheque Nationales-Paris 1985. 4. Lane-Pooe, Stanley, Catalogue of Oriental Coins in the British Museum, London- Vol.ITI(1877) and Vol.IX(1889).

5. Patton, Douglas, Badr al-Din Li'l' Atabeg of Mosul, 1211-1259, University of Washington Press, 1991.

6. Hussaini, Mohammad Bagir, /slamic Coins During the Atabbik Period,

Dar al-Jahidh Press, Baghdad 1966 (in Arabic).

7. Spengler, W, and Sayles,W, Turkoman Figural Bronze Coins and their Iconography- Vol. U- The Zengids, Wisconsin 1996.

# A NEW MINT OF 'ALA AL-DIN MUHAMMAD KHWARIZMSHAH

## By A Grachev

Monetary circulation in central Asia before the Mongol invasion remains an understudied area. New evidence can significantly

improve the picture of monetary circulation, the local economy,

and improve the reconstruction of those years by historians.

In the present article the author describes several previously unpublished coins struck from the mints of Kasan and Ma'din. The author reconstructs the historical events of the first half of the

thirteenth century in Kasan on the basis of this new numismatic

data and hopes to initiate a discussion about the location of the Ma'aden mint. Kasan

In 2008-2009, the author was made aware of three coins of similar

design originally described as Qarakhanid. Close study of the coins showed that the coins are silver-plated copper dirhams

minted on behalf of the Khwarizmshah Muhammad b. Tekesh, at the mint of Kasan.

The first coin seen has the date AH 609. A search for similar

coins in the literature brought no results, but on the internet portal <https://www.zeno.ru> a second coin, also described as a silver-plated

copper dirham, was found, likewise minted in Kasan, and with the

date AH 615 (zeno # 45788). Some time later the author was shown a third coin in a private collection. Description of the coins:

$$ Kasan, AH 609 (D =38, 36, 38mm; weight =7,9; 7,93; 7,95 gr.) $$ Fig 1. Drawing of the coin dated AH 609 Obv.: In the field:

# السطان الاعظم‎

## علا الدنيا و الد‎

## ‏Oo ابو تفلاح محمد

# بن اطسلن تكش Marginal legend:

# سنه تسع ةئامتسو‎ (02 ASN) oll: ضرب بهزا مهردل سكة‎ Rev. In the field:

## لا اله الا‎

## الله و حده‎

# لا شريك له‎ نيدلرصانلا‎ Marginal legend:

# ناساكبا 02( عست هنس هئامتسو‎ oly يهزا مهردل سكه‎ CO pie

Kasan, AH 615 (D = 40mm, 39mm, weight =5,8gr., nd) Fig 2. Drawing of the coin dated AH 615 Oby. In the field:

# لسطا نى‎

# السطان الاعظم‎

## علا الدنيا و الد‎

## ين ابو حتفلا عمل‎ Marginal legend:

# +...هرا لذن سميع...‎

Rev. A circle encompassed by a square with ornate corners:

# الناصر الا اله اللا

# الله محمد

# رسول الله

## لدين الله Beneath the square:

The city of Kasan in the Farghana Valley is known from preMongol times. Modern scholarship locates ancient settlement in

the Namangan region in Uzbekistan, on the Kasansay river. Medieval chronicles from the 7 century indicate it was the

headquarters of the Tuskish Khagan. After the Arab conquest Kasan gradually lost its pre-eminent position and its status as capital was eventually transferred to Akhsikat. --- Kassan-sayskoyé Vodokhranilighene 12km Iskavat Begovat Kasansa' J Khod shashirkent Yangikurgen t Kasan Uzbekistan Chartak

| Uychi | nohgrugaruT‏nagnamaNعوناضة |
|:--- |:--- |
| Dzhidakapa | Akhsiket |
| Mary | Baliqcht | Dzhidakapa Akhsiket Mary Baliqcht Andizhan Mingbulak Fig 3. Map of Kasdan and Akhsikat

Once the Qarakhanids assumed power, 13532 was again at the centre of political events. This led to an economic revival in the city, and, as a consequence, in AH 421 it began to issue coinage. In

the second half of the twelfth century Kasan became the capital of

a small territory ruled by the khans of the Farghana branch of the

Qarakhanid dynasty. The coinage of this period is abundant, as indicated by hoards and single finds. As written information on

events in Kasan on the eve of the Mongol invasion is scarce, so coins have become the principle source for the chronology of local rulers.

At present for the early 13th century in Kasan a coin of Ulugh Tughril Khan (whose coins have the Jagab - "Muiz al-Dunya wa al-Din") is known with the date AH 605, and his predecessor,

Muhammmad b. Nasr, is known to have issued coins up to the year AH 598 \[Kochnev 1997, p. 271\]

In the period of the late Qarakhanids Kasan was under the sway of the Qarakhitays (following the battle of Qatawan in AD

1141), and the governor of Kasan paid a tribute to the Gurkhan as

overlord \[M. Biran 2005, p. 105\]. It is known from YuanShi that

the Qarakhitay baskak of Kasan was a certain Isma'il. When the Mongols invaded Turkestan, Isma'il surrendered to them and later

became a famous commander in the army of Genghis Khan \[YuanShi, p. 222\].

The coins presented above, minted on behalf of the Khwarizmshah in AH 609 and AH 615 are very important for the

chronology of events. After the defeat of the Qarakhitay by the Khwarizmshah in AH 606 \[Ibn Asir, p. 333-335\] (Z. Bunyatov

dates this event differently, to Rabi' I AH 607 \[Bunijatov 1986, p. 75\]), both a governor and shihna were appointed in all cities, up to

Uzgend. This event is reflected in the minting of coins with two names from Uzgend in AH 607 \[Davidovich, 1994, str.177-195\]. Therefore, Kasan was under the administration of Khwarizm from

AH 607, and in all probability the Kasan ruler was at this time a

vassal of Khwarizm (as well as Qadir Khan in Uzgend). In AH 609, repressive measures were applied by the Khwarizmshah and coins in Uzgend and Kasan were issued only on behalf of

Muhammad b. Tekesh \[Davidovich, 1994, str.190\].

Returning to baskak Isma'il, we can propose several versions of his reign in Kasan. According to one version of events, 1510311 was in Kasan until the conquest by the Khwarizmshah and left

with his troops in the service of the Mongols, no later than AH 607.

An alternative scenario assumes that Isma'il could have been baskak in Kasan from 610 to 614. Quchlug conquered Uzgend and

Kasan in AH 610. The capture of these cities has been assumed

from the minting of anonymous silver-plated dirhams in Uzgend with the title "Hanan-han", which V.N. Nastich identifies with the

coinage of the Gurkhan under the control of Quchlug \[Nastich

1998,.م‎ 59-60\]. Additionally, Ibn Asir's annals records the

evacuation of people from the cities of Farghana (including Kasan) because of the conflict between the Khwarizmshah and Quchlug Khan \[Ibn Asir,.م‎ 337\]). In AH 614 the armies of

Genghis Khan defeated Quchlug and, early the following year,

Quchlug was killed in Badakhshan having fled from the Mongols

\[Rashid ad-Din, p. 183\] (in the annals of an-Nasavi, Genghis Khan's victory over Quchlug is given an earlier date of AH 612). It

seems likely that Kasan was returned to the control of the Khwarizmshah while Isma'tl and his horsemen went to the Mongols. The return of Kasan to the Khwarezmshah's control is

confirmed by the silver-plated dirham minted in Kasan in AH 615

on behalf of 'Ala al-Din Muhammad Khwarizmshah. Ma'din

The coin was first published on Zeno.ru (# 69022) and later studied more closely by the present author. Fig 4. Ma'aden, AH 611

The coin description: Ma'din, AH 611 (D= 37 mm, weight =2.83 g) Obv.: In the field:

# ناطلسلا‎

# اللا عظم‎

## علا الد‎ Marginal legend:

# ابمعدن سنه احدى عشر...‎ Rey. In the field:

## نيا و الد ين‎

## ن تكش‎ Marginal legend:

##.. ابمعدن سنه احدى ع‎

Ma'din (also transcribed as: Ma'adan, Ma'den) is a new mint

in Khwarizmshah numismatics and there are some difficulties in

relating this mint to any geographical location (city, region). One

possible translation from Arabic for the word Ma'din is 'mine'

and most likely this is a case of the coin being minted directly at

the mine. Similar cases of coin production at the mines are known

from the time of the Abbasids. Known abbasids dirhams include

those minted in Ma'din Bajunays, Ma'din al-Shash mint and Samanid multidirhams minted at Ma'din.

The dirhams minted in the time of the Abbasids and Samanids were silver, which means the Ma'din mint(s) in question must

have been located amongst silver mines. The dirham described in

this article is copper, with traces of silver; therefore the location

must be a copper mine. According to Ivanov's work on the history of mining in Central Asia \[Ivanov 1932, p. 24\], the copper mines

in the Middle Ages were located in Ferghana (Kara-mazar mines

located in the north of Khujand and mines in the valley of the Koh river), and in Shash (Koh-i-Mansir mines). In addition to copper,

the Kara-mazar and Koh-i-Mansir mines actively extracted other

metals, including silver, and could, therefore, have supplied

material for the minting of these coins, including the process of silver-plating.

Since both these mines were located in the territory of the

Khwarizmshah they are both candidates for the Ma'din mint. A

precise solution will only be possible after sufficient accumulation
of statistics on the finds of coins (including hoards) struck from this Ma'din mint. References:

1.  Bunijatov 1986 - Z.M. Bunijatov, "Gosudarstvo HorezmshahoyAushtegenidov, 1097-1231", Moscow, 1986.

2.  Biran 2005 - Michal Biran, "The Empire of the Qara Khitai in Eurasian History: Between China and the Islamic World", Cambridge,

Davidovich, 1992 - مع‎ Davidovich, "Muhammad b. Tekesh i

poslednie karahanidy (numizmaticheskie korrektivy)", in book: Vostochnoe \_Istoricheskoe \_istochnikovedenie special'nye istoricheskie discipliny, vol. 2, Moscow, 1994.

4.  Ibn Asir - Ibn Asir, "al-Kamil fi't-Tarih" (translating on Russian), Tashkent, 2006.

5.  Ivanov 1932 - P.P. Ivanov, "K istorii razvitija gornogo promysla v Srednej Azii", Moscow-Leningrad, 1932.

6.  Kochnev, 1997 - B.D. Kochnev "Svod nadpisej na karahanidskih monetah", in book: Vostochnoe Istoricheskoe istochnikovedenie i

special'nye istoricheskie discipliny, vol. 5, Moscow, 1997.

7.  Nastich -" Nastich 1998 - V.N. Nastich, "Zagadochnyj uzgendskij 'golodnyj' dirham 610AH. - chekan  Karahytajskogo gurhana?", in book: Shestaja Vserossijskaja numizmaticheskaja konferencija, Tezisy dokladov i soobwenij, SPb., 1998.

8.  Rashid ad-Din - Rashid ad-Din, "Jami al-Tawarikh" (translated in Russian), vol. 1, part 2, Leningrad, 1952.

# THE OTTOMAN SILVER COINS OF THE TARABLUS GHARB MINT IN THE NAME

# OF SULAYMAN II Ww

## By Giorgi Janjgava and Irakli Paghava

## The objective of this short paper is to publish a silver coin bearing

the mint name Tarablus Gharb (J "(طبوازلس‎ and dated AH 1099.

This is the accession year for Sulayman II, the Ottoman sultan (AH

1099-1102 AD 1687-1691) and the coin bears his name as well. To

the best of our knowledge, no silver coinage of Tarablus Gharb of this year has been published hitherto'. The coin is as follows: AR (Billon?°), weight 1.36 g, size 18.6-19 mm, die axis 8:15. Fig. 1.

## Obverse

# ناخ نب (سلطان املسن خان بن يهاربام خان):‏esreveR

# خب ليلس ‏by

| غر | في |
|:--- |:--- |
| (ضربطرابلس غرب في | ‏5)1١1 |
| Fig. | 1 Ottoman Empire, Sulayman IT, AR (Bi), beslik?, An 1099. |

# (ضرب طرابلس غرب في ‏5)1١1

Fig. 1 Ottoman Empire, Sulayman IT, AR (Bi), beslik?, An 1099.

Weight 1.36 g, size 18.6-19 mm, die axis 8:15.

Based on the weight, the denomination is perhaps a beslik, the piece of five, the standard one for the Tarablus Gharb mint\*. The accession date is engraved on the coin, so it could have been struck somewhat later on too, up to AH 1002, the last year of Sulayman II's reign.

Taking into account the relative rarity of the Tarablus Gharb coinage, it would not be inappropriate to publish two more specimens from this mint, of dates already known, that are also at our disposal (Figs. 2-3, metrology provided in the captions).

Fig. 2. Ottoman Empire, Mehmed IV, AR (Bi?), beslik?, AH 1059.

Weight 1.34 g, size 19.0-19.9 mm, die axis 11:30.

Fig. 3. Ottoman Empire, Mehmed IV, AR (Bi?), beslik?, AH 1083.

Weight 1.40 g, size 20.5-21.6 mm, die axis 10:30.

All three coins were purchased at the Libyan-Egyptian border and are now preserved in a private collection.

It is to be hoped that the publication of a previously unknown silver coin of Sulayman II from the Tarablus Gharb mint with the

accession date will facilitate research on the monetary policy of

the Ottoman Empire in the reign of Sulayman II, as well as of the economical and political history of Libya. Notes

Now Tripoli, the capital of the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

Cf. Sreckovic 2002:208-210; Schaendlinger 1973:114; Osmanliparalari 2009; Zeno 2009. See also the note on the other coin of the "Tarabulus" (Gharb?) mint and bearing the name of Sulayman

11 and dated 1102 AH (Schaendlinger 1973:114, 67-68). Moreover, a

picture of a very similar but yet another silver (billon?) piece in the

name of Sulayman was presented at one of the online numismatic forums; unfortunately, the date on that coin seems to be effaced completely (Coincommunity 2008: libya3.jpg & libya4.jpg files).

3 No composition analysis could be performed. 4 Sreckovié 2002:208-210. References:

1.  Coincommunity 2008 - "Ottoman Silver Coins Struck in Tarabalus

Gharb (Tripoli, Lib". Coin Forum, Numismatic Education, and Collecting Information \| Coin Community. February 22, 2008. \<<http://www.coincommunity.com/forum/topic.asp?ARCHIVE=true> $$ &TOPIC_ID=23906>. $$ 2.  Osmanliparalari 2009 - "ILSiileyman". Osmanl: Imparatorlugu madeni ve kagit paralart. July ZA, 2009. <<http://www.osmaniliparalari.com/20-2suleyman-1099/202suleyman-serifi.htm\>>.

3.  Schaendlinger 1973 - Schaendlinger A. Osmanische Numismatik. Braunschweig: Klinkhardt & Biermann, 1973. 4.  Sreckovic 2002 - Srecékovi¢ 5. Ottoman Mints and Coins. Belgrade, 2002.

5.  Zeno 2009 - "Ottomans in Libya (Tarabulus Gharb)". Zeno Oriental Coins Database. July 21, 2009. \<<http://www.zeno.ru/showgallery.php?cat=1437\>>.