In Bactria

Demetrios I c.190/S- c.185/180 Euthydemos II /Pantaleon c.180/5 Agathokles c.180- c.170 Antimachos I c.174- c.165 Eukratides I c.170/165- 5

(takes Megas epithet c.162/165) Eukratides II c.145/150- c.140 Heliokles I c.145- ¢.130 In India Demetrios I in India c.186

Pantaleon/Agathokles in India c.180/175 Apollodotos I c.180-c.170 Antimachos I in India, c.170 Antimachos IT c.165 Menander c.165/160-135/130 Eukratides I in India c.160/150 (takes Megas epithet c.162/165)

Many thanks to Jens Jakobsson for many helpful and fruitful discussions. Also thanks to CNG Ince. for illustration 1, bronze coin of Menander. References

1. Justin, M. Juniani lustini. Epitoma Historiarum Philipparum Pompei

Trogi. Accedunt Prologi in Pompeium Trogum, Translation by J.C. Yardley, 1994

2. Wilson, L.M., King Demetrios of India and Eukratides of Bactria,

# ONS 174

3. Jakobsson, J., Indo-Greek Chronology c.220- 145 BCE, 10115 198,

4. Wilson, L.M. and Assar, G.R.F., ReDating Eukratides I relative to

Mithradates I, JONS 191, p.24, 2007 5. Heliodotos inscription, in "Afghanistan, ancien carrefour entre l'Est et Ouest", p133. ISBN 2503516815

6. Tarn, W.W., The Greeks in Bactria and India, Ed. By F.L. Holt, Chicago, 1985

7. Rea, J.R; Senior, R.C; Hollis, AS, A Tax Receipt from Hellenistic

Bactria, Zeitschrift fur Papyrologie und Epigraphik, (in English) Vol. 4, p.261-278, 1994. This contains an excellent discussion by Hollis. 8. MacDowall, D.W., Journal of Inner Asian Art and Archaeology, vol.\\, 2006, pp61-64.

9. Bernard, P. Note sur la Signification Historique du Tresor d'a Ai Khanoum, Revue Numismatique, 1975

10. Narain, A.K. The Indo-Greeks, Oxford, 1957

11. Bopearachchi, O., Monnaies Greco-Bactriennes et Indo grecques, (in

French) Bibliotheque National Paris, 1991 12. Bivar, A.D.H. The Sequence of Menander's Drachmae, Journal of the

Royal Asiatic Society, 1970, pp.123-136 13. Eg. Lot 964, CNG sale 61, 23 Sept 2002; lot 513, CNG sale 38, 6

June 1996; lot 34, CNG Electronic auction 65, 28 May 2003 and Lot 1573, the Fritz, Rudolf, Kunker sale 89, 8 May 2004

14. Holt, Frank, Review of 'Monnaies Greco-Bactriennes et Indo-

grecques', in American J. Numis., 1992, pp.215-222,

15. Wilson, L.M., Demetrios II and Hoards from Ai Khanoum, ONS 180,

16. Kraay, C..M., Demetrius in Bactria and India, Numismatic Digest, vol. 9, 1985, pp12-30

17. Wilson, L.M., Two Types of Eukratides I\] and the Patricide of Eukratides I, ONS 179

18. Senior, R.C., Indo-Scythian Coins and History (ISCH), Vol 1V

Supplement, Classical Numismatic Group, Lancaster, 2006.

19. Senior, R.C., The Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian King Sequences in

the Second and First Centuries BC, Supplement to ONS Newslett.

179, 2004 20. Holt, Frank, Thundering Zeus, University of California Press, 1999 21. Mitchiner, M., Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian Coinage, Vol.1

(and appendix 1), 1975 22. Jakobsson, J., The Greeks of Bactria Revisited, Nomismatika

Khronika, 26, 2007 (published 2009) 23. Bopearachchi, O., in Ancient Indian Coins, Indicopleustoi, 1998 24. Gardner, P., New Coins from Bactria, Numismatic Chronicle, 1-12,

\[\* \] Many thanks to Shafqat Mirza, Haroon Tareen, Karsten Dahmen,

Robert Senior and especially to Robert Bracey.

# SOME ADDITIONS TO 'INDO-GREEK

# CHRONOLOGY' By Jens Jakobsen

A possible indication for dating Demetrios III

My article 'Indo-Greek chronology c.200-145 Bc' in JONS 198 contained a discussion about Demetrios III. I attempted to identify

him with Justin's 'Demetrius, king of the Indians', claiming that

Demetrios III fought with Eukratides I c. 150 BC, perhaps as a vassal-king of Menander I. This would be in accordance with Kraay's dating, but much earlier than current datings of Demetrios

111 by Bopearachchi and Senior (c. 100 and 65 Bc, respectively').

It is admittedly difficult to date the minor ruler Demetrios III,

whose sole monogram (see Fig.l) was unique (even though it resembles several others, including a number of Menander's), and

whose rare coins have not been found in any hoards. There may,

however, be two new clues that support an early dating. The first

is found in L.M. Wilson's 'From Demetrios I to Demetrios III, the

'King of the Indians'?' (the previous article), where Wilson

matches the weight of Demetrios' rare bronzes with one of Menander's early series. The second clue is related to the design of the reverse of Demetrios' silver, which depicts a standing Zeus, facing forward. This type was introduced in Bactria by Agathokles (c.180 Bc), and later repeated by Heliokles I (c.145 Bc). The Indo-

Greek king Heliokles II, who copied the coins of his namesake,

introduced the type in India (c.100 BC), and the following decades saw the emergence of a number of variations, including some

where Zeus is facing to the right side (his own), used by Heliokles II's successors and the Saka kings who replaced them.

There were, however, two basic designs for Zeus' posture;

essentially the position of his legs and feet were mirrored in the

second design. The mirrored posture was introduced by the celators of Heliokles I, and seemingly became the prototype for all later Indian types that I have looked at (see Table 1)\*. The only

exception is Demetrios III, whose type was, instead, modelled on

the Zeus posture on Agathokles' silver. If this posture is really

unique for these two kings, it indicates that Demetrios III may have ruled before Heliokles I, so that Demetrios' reverses were

adapted from the only type that existed then. It would not be

impossible for the old Agathokles posture to reappear on the other

side of the Hindu Kush, even after being dormant for a long

period, but the consistency among all other Indian rulers in

prefering the mirrored posture would make Demetrios' reverses an anomaly, if he really belonged in the 1" century BC, and it definitely weakens the link between him and Heliokles II. A mysterious coin explained

My JONS198 article also contained a reference to a hemidrachm found in India, issued by one Demetrios, but without royal title®. As Mark Passehl kindly pointed out, P.L. Gupta has already solved this mystery\*. The type, with face of Heracles / crab, is typical of the island of Kos, and Demetrios would in that case be a

magistrate. The coin probably arrived in India aboard an Alexandrinian ship, and has nothing to do with Demetrios I of Bactria. Acknowledgements

I would like to thank to L.M. Wilson for extensive help with research and illustrations. Notes

yaarK,)5891( ihchcaraepoB )8991( dna  roineS ).‏6002( ا

1 have studied Bopearachchi's catalogues (1991 & 1998) as well as Senior's ISCH IV (2006), and a number of stray coins. There are of

course numerous variations, but the general right/left dichotomy stands for all the coins I have looked at. 3 Handa (1996) \* Gupta (1999) References

Bopearachchi, O., Monnaies Gréco-Bactriennes et Indo-Grecques, Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, 1991
Bopearachchi, O. (ed), Sylloge Nummorum Graecorum, The collection of

the American Numismatic Society, part 9: Graeco-Bactrian and IndoGreek coins, American Numismatic Society, New York, 1998 Handa, D. (ed.) 'A Note on an Interesting Greek Coin in the Sardar

Museum, Jodhpur', Oriental Numismatic Studies vol.1, 1996, 9-10 Gupta, P. L.,The Greek hemidrachm in Jodhpur Museum', Oriental Numismatic Studies, vol.2 1999, 13-16. Kraay, C. "Demetrius in Bactria and India', Numismatic Digest, Vol. IX (1985), 12-30

Senior, R.C., Indo-Scythian Coins and History Vol IV: Supplement, Classical Numismatic Group, Lancaster, 2006

Table 1. Common standing Zeus postures of Bactrian, Indo-Greek and Saka kings, 2"'-1" centuries BC. Zeus usually has a staff in his left hand, except for some of Archebios' coins, where he holds the aegis.

Posture 1. Right leg bent\] Posture 2. Left leg bent and showing and showing through the\} through the fabric of mantle. Straight(er) fabric of mantle. \| right leg. Left foot pointing more or less Straight(er) left leg. Right forward. Right foot pointing outwards. foot pointing more or less \|\| Right hip often protruding. forward. Left foot pointing outwards.

## Facing forward Facing forward Fe 2008 right

Holding Holding Holding \| Holding \| Holding \| Holding

Hecate in \| thunder-bolt \| fulmen \| Nike, with \| fulmen \| fulmen

right hand (fulmen) elephant high, \| or Nike, right leg or also bent \| making benediction Gesture

## a»

E $$ =, | 3 $$ $$ = $$ gs \| 5 أ‎ $$ 2= $$ m < $$ = $$ \| 5 5 5 \[\| < $$ = $$ Cc a < a

| SN ul. | al ER در‎ |
|:--- |:--- |
| Heliokles I reverse | Azes |
| Fig.1. Reverses of tetradrachms: upper left | Agathokles, upper | Heliokles I reverse Azes

Fig.1. Reverses of tetradrachms: upper left Agathokles, upper

right Demetrios III (courtesy of the Trustees of the British

Museum), lower left Heliokles I and lower right Azes. Other coins courtesy of CNG. Inc.

# ISVARADEVA: A NEW WESTERN

# KSHATRAPA KING

## By Pankaj Tandon!

The purpose of this brief note is to report a coin of a previously unknown Western Kshatrapa king: Isvaradeva, a son of

Rudrasimha I. The coin is illustrated in Figure 1. Fig. 1: Silver drachm of \[svaradeva weight 2.08 gm, diameter 15-16 mm

The date behind the king's head is (Saka era) 13x. Unfortunately,

the units digit of the date (if there is one) is mainly off the flan. The little bit of a possible units digit that is visible curves to the

right, a characteristic unknown for any units digit among the

Brahmi numerals, leading me to suspect that the date may well be

130. Although the tops of some of the letters on the legend, including notably the father's name, are off the flan, it is possible

to reconstruct the legend, starting at 6 o'clock, as:

# J§¥SETMERZUSTT IGE IHS ay aH

Rajno mahakshatrapasa Rudrasihaputrasa Rajno kshatrapasa Isvaradevasa.

Figure 2 shows the reconstructed legend as it would have

appeared on the coin. The only other candidate for the father's

name, given that the bottoms of the letters rudra are clearly visible, would have been Rudrasena. However, as we see on Figure 2, there is a curved line at \| o'clock of the figure that is

compatible only with the letter ha and not with na. Thus the name

on the coin must have been Rudrasiha (Rudrasimha). Fig.2: Reconstructed legend

The individual who first showed me the coin suggested that it was

a coin of the Abhira king, Isvaradeva, who is mentioned by Jha and Rajgor in their study of Western Kshatrapa coinage". An inscription of this king, dated 5. 254, is known. If the date on my coin were read as 23x, it might be compatible with the Abhira

ruler's reign, and this was the date read by my source. There is a

slight die imperfection at the spot where a horizontal line on the

100:5 numeral would render it to read 200, however, a close

examination of the coin reveals that there is no actual line there,

only the die flaw, so that the 100's digit indeed reads 100. To