of statistics on the finds of coins (including hoards) struck from this Ma'din mint. References:

1.  Bunijatov 1986 - Z.M. Bunijatov, "Gosudarstvo HorezmshahoyAushtegenidov, 1097-1231", Moscow, 1986.

2.  Biran 2005 - Michal Biran, "The Empire of the Qara Khitai in Eurasian History: Between China and the Islamic World", Cambridge,

Davidovich, 1992 - مع‎ Davidovich, "Muhammad b. Tekesh i

poslednie karahanidy (numizmaticheskie korrektivy)", in book: Vostochnoe \_Istoricheskoe \_istochnikovedenie special'nye istoricheskie discipliny, vol. 2, Moscow, 1994.

4.  Ibn Asir - Ibn Asir, "al-Kamil fi't-Tarih" (translating on Russian), Tashkent, 2006.

5.  Ivanov 1932 - P.P. Ivanov, "K istorii razvitija gornogo promysla v Srednej Azii", Moscow-Leningrad, 1932.

6.  Kochnev, 1997 - B.D. Kochnev "Svod nadpisej na karahanidskih monetah", in book: Vostochnoe Istoricheskoe istochnikovedenie i

special'nye istoricheskie discipliny, vol. 5, Moscow, 1997.

7.  Nastich -" Nastich 1998 - V.N. Nastich, "Zagadochnyj uzgendskij 'golodnyj' dirham 610AH. - chekan  Karahytajskogo gurhana?", in book: Shestaja Vserossijskaja numizmaticheskaja konferencija, Tezisy dokladov i soobwenij, SPb., 1998.

8.  Rashid ad-Din - Rashid ad-Din, "Jami al-Tawarikh" (translated in Russian), vol. 1, part 2, Leningrad, 1952.

# THE OTTOMAN SILVER COINS OF THE TARABLUS GHARB MINT IN THE NAME

# OF SULAYMAN II Ww

## By Giorgi Janjgava and Irakli Paghava

## The objective of this short paper is to publish a silver coin bearing

the mint name Tarablus Gharb (J "(طبوازلس‎ and dated AH 1099.

This is the accession year for Sulayman II, the Ottoman sultan (AH

1099-1102 AD 1687-1691) and the coin bears his name as well. To

the best of our knowledge, no silver coinage of Tarablus Gharb of this year has been published hitherto'. The coin is as follows: AR (Billon?°), weight 1.36 g, size 18.6-19 mm, die axis 8:15. Fig. 1.

## Obverse

# ناخ نب (سلطان املسن خان بن يهاربام خان):‏esreveR

# خب ليلس ‏by

| غر | في |
|:--- |:--- |
| (ضربطرابلس غرب في | ‏5)1١1 |
| Fig. | 1 Ottoman Empire, Sulayman IT, AR (Bi), beslik?, An 1099. |

# (ضرب طرابلس غرب في ‏5)1١1

Fig. 1 Ottoman Empire, Sulayman IT, AR (Bi), beslik?, An 1099.

Weight 1.36 g, size 18.6-19 mm, die axis 8:15.

Based on the weight, the denomination is perhaps a beslik, the piece of five, the standard one for the Tarablus Gharb mint\*. The accession date is engraved on the coin, so it could have been struck somewhat later on too, up to AH 1002, the last year of Sulayman II's reign.

Taking into account the relative rarity of the Tarablus Gharb coinage, it would not be inappropriate to publish two more specimens from this mint, of dates already known, that are also at our disposal (Figs. 2-3, metrology provided in the captions).

Fig. 2. Ottoman Empire, Mehmed IV, AR (Bi?), beslik?, AH 1059.

Weight 1.34 g, size 19.0-19.9 mm, die axis 11:30.

Fig. 3. Ottoman Empire, Mehmed IV, AR (Bi?), beslik?, AH 1083.

Weight 1.40 g, size 20.5-21.6 mm, die axis 10:30.

All three coins were purchased at the Libyan-Egyptian border and are now preserved in a private collection.

It is to be hoped that the publication of a previously unknown silver coin of Sulayman II from the Tarablus Gharb mint with the

accession date will facilitate research on the monetary policy of

the Ottoman Empire in the reign of Sulayman II, as well as of the economical and political history of Libya. Notes

Now Tripoli, the capital of the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

Cf. Sreckovic 2002:208-210; Schaendlinger 1973:114; Osmanliparalari 2009; Zeno 2009. See also the note on the other coin of the "Tarabulus" (Gharb?) mint and bearing the name of Sulayman

11 and dated 1102 AH (Schaendlinger 1973:114, 67-68). Moreover, a

picture of a very similar but yet another silver (billon?) piece in the

name of Sulayman was presented at one of the online numismatic forums; unfortunately, the date on that coin seems to be effaced completely (Coincommunity 2008: libya3.jpg & libya4.jpg files).

3 No composition analysis could be performed. 4 Sreckovié 2002:208-210. References:

1.  Coincommunity 2008 - "Ottoman Silver Coins Struck in Tarabalus

Gharb (Tripoli, Lib". Coin Forum, Numismatic Education, and Collecting Information \| Coin Community. February 22, 2008. \<<http://www.coincommunity.com/forum/topic.asp?ARCHIVE=true> $$ &TOPIC_ID=23906>. $$ 2.  Osmanliparalari 2009 - "ILSiileyman". Osmanl: Imparatorlugu madeni ve kagit paralart. July ZA, 2009. <<http://www.osmaniliparalari.com/20-2suleyman-1099/202suleyman-serifi.htm\>>.

3.  Schaendlinger 1973 - Schaendlinger A. Osmanische Numismatik. Braunschweig: Klinkhardt & Biermann, 1973. 4.  Sreckovic 2002 - Srecékovi¢ 5. Ottoman Mints and Coins. Belgrade, 2002.

5.  Zeno 2009 - "Ottomans in Libya (Tarabulus Gharb)". Zeno Oriental Coins Database. July 21, 2009. \<<http://www.zeno.ru/showgallery.php?cat=1437\>>.