highly improbable in our opinion, and these coins should be considered as late Umayyad fuliis"'.

These Tiflis copper coins bear no date, but now, with the identity of the emir revealed with sufficient, as we think, credibility, we could more or less safely attribute them to the 12-

13 year period of AH 114-126/7 (732/3-744). The other two fulus

that bear his name and the title Emir are dated \[AH\] 115 and 125 (correspondingly 733/4 and 742/3). According to the data at our disposal it as though Marwan b. Muhammad started issuing copper coinage in his name almost immediately after arriving in

the region and continued doing so at least till the end of his stay there.

In conclusion, one may reiterate that, based on the analysed material, the monetary issues in Tiflis, the centre of the Arab dominions in Georgia, were not limited to silver (and probably gold too)\*!, but included a copper coinage, namely the fulis as well. The latter bore no date but were minted in the period AH

114-126/7 (732/3-744), in the time of Marwan b. Muhammad, i.e. Murvan the Deaf, as he was referred to in Georgia, the Umayyad ruler of the northern provinces of the caliphate, who later became

the Caliph. The fuliis bore his name (the ism and the nasab) as well. This sheds light on the political, administrative and economic status of Tiflis, and will serve for further research into the economic history of Georgia and the rest of the region.

In addition to their significance for the monetary history of the region, the four Umayyad fultis described and presented above

attest to the political situation in the South Caucasus in AH 114-

126/7 (732/3-744), and to the monetary policy of the caliphate authorities. The appearance of the name of the new and vigorous provincial governor on the copper coins issued locally seems to be significant. These fulis throw some more light on Marwan b. Muhammad's activities in the South Caucasus. References: 1.  Turkia 2007.

2. غ1‎ first appeared in summer of 2006 and was found in the Mtkvari

(Kura) riverbed, in the territory of the Ortachala district of Tbilisi;

the coin was preserved in a private collection in Georgia (Ibid).

3.  Forschungsstelle fiir Islamische Numismatik der Universitat Tiibingen, AM10B3 (Shamma:233; personal communication from Dr Lutz Ilisch); We would like to take this opportunity to express our profound gratitude to Dr Lutz Ilisch (Tiibingen) for his support of

this research. 4.  Zeno: #51349, <<http://www.zeno.ru/showphoto.php>?photo=51349>. From a private collection in the Republic of Armenia?

5.  Personal communication from Mr Vadim Kalinin.

6.  The effaced fragments of the Arabic text reconstructed by us are indicated by underlining.

7.  Turkia 2007:6-7. The drawing produced (/bid.:7, Fig. 2) reflected our incorrect interpretation of the nasab. 8.  Ibid.:7.

9.  Personal communication from Mr Vadim Kalinin. We are very indebted to Mr Vadim Kalinin for generously sharing his expertise. 10.  Ibid. 11.  Shamma:233.

12.  Forschungsstelle fiir Islamische Numismatik der Universitat Tubingen, AM10B3 (Shamma:233).

13.  The name Marwan on this coin was first read by S. Album, whereas - Ilisch attributed it later as "Umayyad, Marwan ibn Muhammad" (Personal communication from Dr Lutz llisch). 14.  Javakhishvili:78-80. 15.  Ibid. 16.  Shamma:233.

17.  Zeno. By July 25, 2009 the database contained the entries for 699 Umayyad and 241 Abbasid fultis (/bid.).

18.  Ibid.: #51349, <<http://www.zeno.ru/showphoto.php>?photo=51349>.

19.  The central obverse legends on the Tiflis fuliis resemble those on the Barda'a AH 142 and 143 (759/60 and 760/1) fuliis (Mushegyan:64, ##23-24, plate 6, ##59-60), although the latter have different

marginal legends. This typological similarity made us erroneously conjecture in our earlier work that the Tiflis fuliis of this type could had been minted in the 750s or 760s (Turkia 2007:7), i.e. in the postMarwan b. Muhammad period.

20.  In our earlier work we were inclined to consider the copper coins of

this type to constitute Abbasid fultis, perhaps early ones (/bid.).

21.  We summarised recent scholarship on the Tiflis Umayyad and Abbasid issues in our earlier works (cf. Turkia 2007:7; Turkia 2008:6, footnote 12).

# THE FIRST KNOWN COIN OF

# MA'MUN 11 B. MA'MUNI, KHWARIZMSHAH MA'MUNID

## by Vadim Kalinin (Moscow)

The history of Khwarizm in the 10" century and beginning of the 1 century AD is still very scantily known from coins. The same is true of the coinage of the Ma'minids of Gurganj, who ruled in Khwarizm from AH 385/ AD 995. Four sultans of this dynasty are known:!

1. Abi "Ali Ma'miin I b. Muhammad (AH 385-387/ AD 995- 997),

2. Abii' l-Hasan 'Ali b. Ma'miin I (AH 387-399/ AD 997-1009), 3. Abi' l-"Abbas Ma'miin II b. Ma'miin I (AH 399-407/ aD 1009-1017),

4. Abi' l-Harith Muhammad b. 'Ali (AH 407--408/ aD 1017).

In the time of Muhammad b. 'Ali the whole of Khwarizm was conquered by Mahmid -  Sebuktegin Ghaznavid. This

understanding of the Ma'mitnids was altered recently by the publication of the coins of Mahmiid's hajib, Altuntash."

Among the Ma' miinids only the coins of "Ali b. Ma'miin were

known. These coins, are known from the mints of Khwarizm, Kath, Jurjaniyya, Faravah, Nisa' and Bukhara.\* Published below

is a coin found amongst a group of Islamic coins, acquired in Turkmenistan at the end of the 1980s and kept in a private collection in Novgorod (Russia). The coin is made of billon, weight 7.1g, size 35x33 mm. Obverse: inscription in the plain circle

# لا اله الا الله

# عهده الغالب للابه

# قو

lanigraM  dnegel fo eht esrevbo  si yllaitrap:‏elbisiv

# bo \]...‏llap ىف نيدمة خوارزم سنة خمس...

Reverse: inscription in the double plain circle:

## \[ol\]

# محمد رسول الله‎

# عين قنيزو.ةلودلا‎

# ةلملا سابعلاوبا‎

# خوارزم

lanigraM  dnegel fo esrever si  yllaitrap  elbisiv  dna si  a  tnemgarf ‏fo sharits 92:84 dna  33:9  fo eht:‏na'ruQ

#...‏gaG ىلع هرهظيل قحا نيدو.نيدلا..

The date on the coin is unclear - the hundreds are invisible, and only 'five' can be read clearly, which dates the coin to AH \[40\]5. According to the inscription, the coin was struck in the reign of Ma'min II b. Ma'miin I (AH 399-407) in Madinat, Khwarizm, in

AH 405. The /agab used on the coin - "Ayn al-Dawla wa Zayn alMilla (eye of the state and beauty of the Muslim commune) was received by Ma' mii II from caliph al-Qadir°.
The name of caliph al-Qadir on this coin is accompanied by

## the title-like expression UL ولى عهده الغالب‎ "Heir of His throne,

overcoming thanks to Allah" as on the contemporary coins of the

Buwayhids, cf. coin of Abi'l-Fawaris Qiwam al-Dawla struck in Shiraz in the near AH 404408 years.'

The end of the reign of Abi' \|-"Abbas Ma' miin II b. Ma' min I,

the decline of the Ma'munids and the capture of Khwarizm by

sultan Mahmiid Ghaznavi are described in detail in the Ta'rikh-i Mas'iid (see part "Reminder about Khwarizm") of Abi'l-Fadl Beyhagi. Notes

'Bosworth ©. E., The New Islamic Dynasties, Edinburgh, 1996, p. 178.

2 Kalinin V. A., Kleschinov V. A., "Monety khorezmshakha Altuntasha", XII All-Russian Numismatic Conference, Moscow 19-24th of Arpil, 2004,

Abstracts of Papers and Communications, Moscow, 2004, pp. 67-68.

3 Numismatic on-line database ZENO (<http://zeno.ru),> nos. 4808, 52027.

\* Markov. A. K., "O klade kuficheskikh monet, naydennykh v sele

Krescheny Baran, Spasskogo uezda Kazanskoy gubernii," Tipografija Imperatorskoy Akademii Nauk, St.Petersburg, 1908, pp. 4-10. \* ZENO no. 64939.

©" Abii' l-Fadl Bayhagi. Tashkent, 1969, pp. 809.

7 Treadwell L., Buyid coinage. A Die Corpus (322-445), Oxford, 2001, coins nos. Sh404-407b.

\* Aba' l-Fadl Bayhagi. Ta'rikh-i Mas'iid, ibid, pp. 808-836. Ta'rikh-i Mas'iid, transl. by Arends A. K.,

# THE DIKHASHKHO HOARD OF

GEORGIAN-HULAGID CHRISTIAN DIRHAMS: PRELIMINARY RESULTS

By Irakli Paghava, Roland Spanderashvili & Shalva Parkosadze

Objectives & Methods Our goal is to analyse a hoard of Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams! excavated in the village of Dikhashkho, in the Imereti province of Georgia.

We attempted to analyse this hoard in relation to the

economic, monetary, and political history of Georgia, South Caucasus, the Mongol Empire and the Ilkhan State in general. Within the framework of the set objectives we attributed the coins

to rulers, identified types, read dates, and studied their weight

standard and die axis; a die analysis was also undertaken and the historical background explored.

General hoard data The only information on provenance is the finders' report, and

could not be verified in any other way. However, there seems to be no reason to doubt the finders account.

The hoard was discovered in the village of Dikhashkho, in Vani district, in Imereti (a historical province in Western Georgia) (cf. Map 1), in the early 2000s. During agricultural work (tillage?) on one of the plots of the land next to the village (the

precise location was not specified) the hand-held farm implement

ran into the top of a kvevri, the traditional Georgian ceramic vessel

for storing wine, which used to be stored in the ground. The

finders started to dig it out, and discovered 6 more ceramic vessels of a smaller size (described as "pots") which had been buried

around the kvevri. One of those 6 vessels contained several

handfuls of silver coins of similar appearance, allegedly, more than one hundred.

The type of container is peculiar, but not unparalleled. For instance, a Georgian imitation of an asper of the Empire of Trebizond (13'°-14" century) was discovered at Sairme (also in Imereti) in a similar kvevri?. The selection of such a container

points in our opinion to the owner of the kvevri and most probably of the area proper as the person who possessed this money: one would not have concealed one's treasure in someone else's household vessel.

# geet ag

Map 1. 'Modem map of Georgia. Dikhashkho aad find Toe ation.

Unfortunately, the finders dispersed the hoard, selling it piecemeal. The authors managed to get access to a private collection of Mongol coins\* comprising a major part of the Dikhashkho hoard, namely, 51 coins. They were all so-called

Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams minted in eastern Georgia (Tiflis mint)\* in the name of several IIkhans: Arghun (25 coins, 49.02% of the total number), Arghun and his heir Qazan (2, 3.92%), Gaykhatu (21, 41.18%) and Baydu (3, 5.88%). The

detailed information on these 51 coins, including the dates, metrology etc. is presented in Table \[. The types are well known?

and it seems un-necessary to repeat their detailed description.

The earliest coins from this hoard are Ar17 and Ar25 as far as

we can judge by the remaining dates in the external segments. The

date 5 is clearly visible on the former coin in the top segment,

whereas what remains in the left segment of Ar25 may be either 1

or 5, but as Arghun ascended the throne in AH 683 and died in 690, the coin should bear 685 as well. Of course, we cannot exclude the possibility that some coins of Arghun, bore earlier

dates on effaced or off-flan segments. The latest coins ought to be

the 3 dirhams of Baydu (B1-3), who ascended the throne in AH

694 and ruled for several months; all the dirhams in his name bear the date AH 694°. Thus, the time span for the coins represented in

the Dikhashkho hoard is AH 685-694 or AH 683-694 at the very

outside. It is also quite remarkable that the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams of Abagha were not represented in the Dikhashkho hoard at all, despite being quite common. No Tiflis dirhams of Davit VIII dated AH 695 and 696' were represented in

it either, and it indicates that the Dikhashkho hoard was probably buried in the late AH 690s, maybe in AH 694 or 695.

Historical background We will review the contemporary political situation in the Georgian Kingdom (cf. Map 2) in order to put the Dikhashkho

hoard in its proper historical context and extract the maximum possible information from it.

The first Mongol intrusion into the territory of the Georgian Kingdom dates back to 12207. However, the conquest proper started later, in 1235-1236' and resulted in the more or less effective and prolonged subjugation of the Georgian state'". However, western Georgia as well as parts of the south-western

Georgia escaped the Mongol yoke, and secured a more or less

permanent independence under the leadership of King Davit VI Narin, son of Queen Rusudani, after his revolt in 12591".

On the other hand, this meant the effective partitioning of the

state. Davit VI Narin ruled independently in western Georgia, i.e.

in Imereti (literally, the \[place\] beyond, referring to the Likhi