# APOOACTIO (LRUVASPA) AE COIN OF KANISHKA THE GREAT: GENUINE OR

# (ANCIENT) FORGERY? By Hans Loeschner

Though the Kushan coins were studied and characterized intensively by Robert Gobl':? some so far unknown coin types are still emerging.» +56 7 A further, to the author's knowledge, unique coin is shown below. The AE coin has a size of 18/22 mm

a weight of 6.7g, and a die axis of 12h. On the obverse, the fully

bearded Kushan emperor is shown offering at an altar. The attribution to Kanishka the Great is clear from the inscription PAONANOPAO KA-NIPKH KOPANO (with P for "Sh"). On

the reverse the god Lruvdspa is standing in front of a horse which is walking to right. The god turns his upper body to his left holding a wreath in his right hand. In the upper left field is the tamgha of Kanishka the Great. At right there is the inscription APOOACIIO (obvious when looking at the coin under oblique view).

APOOACIIO, to be identified with the Middle Persian name Lruvaspa / Lohrasp and is the male form ("guarding the horse") of

the Avestan goddess Drvdspa (or Druudspd, \\it., with solid horses").\*° The attribution to APOOACTIO is also obvious by comparing the reverse of this AE coin to that of published gold coins (Gébl 1984, plate 7, No. 57).

Kanishka the Great started a new era whose Year \| date has been discussed since the late 19"" century. J.F. Fleet'® erroneously put forward 58/57 Bc which was corrected to AD 78 in the early 20th century. Recent studies put forward AD 7811 ap 127156 ap

## 131135 and AD 227/232'\*'\*!°. The present common view is that the

Kanishka era started AD 127'° which was proposed by Harry Falk!", but recent comparative studies have concluded it is not yet

time to discard AD 78 for Year 1 of the Kanishka era, as it might turn out to be the correct date.'"!\*!?

Discussion Robert Bracey doubts this novel coin type to be genuine, putting forward the following arguments:

٠ The legend is in full (like the gold coins), not the abbreviated PAO KANHPKI.

٠ The legend starts at 7 o'clock (like the gold), not at 1 o'clock.

٠ The kings sword is depicted projecting away from his body (like

the gold), but this feature is absent from the copper.

٠ It is also too light to be a didrachm and too heavy for a drachm. The author obtained this coin from a well respected coin dealer

and the price of the coin was very low. Taking up the point that there is little profit in it for the forger, Robert Bracey accepts that it might be an ancient forgery rather than a modern one, though evidence for this is lacking. The author argues that this coin might have been shaped by a die cutter who obtained an order to shape gold as well as AE coins on the (rare) occasion of a festivity for this god Lruvaspa. This might explain the scarcity of these probably commemorative gold and AE issues. The same may apply to the so far unique "unbearded" Kanishka AE coin.\* The publication of this coin type so far was not followed by the offering of such coins on the open market. Thus, again in this case there is very low probability of a recent forgery. Bob Senior is convinced that the "unbearded" Kanishka coin is genuine which

# TT

he also thinks is the case for the Lruvaspa AE coin: "The coin is obviously ancient and at worst might have been a contemporary forgery imitating a gold coin or the product of a small local mint

taking the gold coin as its model. If it was intended as a forgery

they would have made it perfectly round and thick like the gold coin and gold plated it - it obviously therefore wasn't intended to deceive."

In contrast, Michael Alram, whom the author asked for a

further opinion on the Lruvaspa AE coin, shares the view of Robert Bracey.

Acknowledgements The author thanks Robert Bracey for his most valuable comments

and suggestions as well as Bob Senior and Michael Alram for having a look on this topic. Notes

1. Robert Gobl, "Miinzpréigung des KusGn-reichesTM (Osterreichische

Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vienna, 1984) 2. Robert Gébl, "Donum Burns, die Kusan-miinzen im Miinzkabinett Bern

und die ChronologieTM\* (Fassbaender, Vienna, 1993) 3. Bob Senior, "A Few More Rare Indian Ancient Coins", ONS

Newsletters 179, pp. 24-26, coin No. 94 on p. 25 (2004) 4. Hans Loeschner, "A novel Kushan coin type of Kanishka the Great",

JONS 193, pp. 12-13 (2007) 5. M. Nasim Khan, "Coins from Kashmir Smast - New Numismatic

EvidenceTM,.م‎ 54, No. 45 and 45a (Department of Archaeology, University of Peshawar, 2008) 6. Joe Cribb, "Die Chronologie Gandharas anhand der Miinzen", pp. 64-

69 and "Miinzen mit diversen Kushana-GottheitenTM, pp. 145-153 in "Gandhara - das Buddhistische Erbe PakistansTM (Philipp von Zabern, Mainz, 2009) ١ 7. 0. Bopearachchi and W. Pieper, "Siva cursing Apasmarapurusa on a

Huvishka coin", JONS 200, pp. 35-36 (2009) 8. J. Harmatta, with contributions of B.N. Puri, L. Lelekov, S. Humayan

and D.C. Sircar, "Religions in the Kushan Empire", pp. 313 329 in "History and Civilizations of Central Asia, Vol. II, editor: Janos Harmatta, co-editors: B.N. Puri and G.F. Etemadi (Unesco Publishing, Paris, 1994),.م‎ 324: "Lroaspo was an ancient pre-Zoroastrian god

ensuring the health of the horses of the Iranian equestrian nomadic

tribes and his name was preserved in the form of the hydronym Dyrapses, reflecting the Alanian outcome "Druvaspa" of Old Iranian

"DruvaspaTM. Lruvaspa occurring on the Kushan coins may represent

the Bactrian development of Druvaspa. Obviously, the Bactrians, who had excellent cavalry and a famous race of horses, worshipped

"Druvaspa - Lruvaspa" since their immigrations to Bactria. 9. Jean Kellens, "DRVASPA", Encyclopaedia Iranica, published on website: <https://www.iranica.com>

10. J.F. Fleet, "The Date of Kanishka\*, JRAS 1913, pp. 913-920 and 965-

1011, JRAS 1914, pp. 987-992 (Journal of the Asiatic Society,

London, 1913/4) 11. Robert C. Senior, "/ndo-Sythian Coins and History", Volumes I - III /

2001 and Volume IV / 2006 (Classical Numismatic Group, London, 2001 and 2006)

12. Harry Falk, "The yuga of Sphujiddhvaja and the era of the Kusdanas'',

pp. 121-136 in Silk Road Art and Archaeology Vol. 7, (Institute of Silk Road Studies, Kamakura, 2001)

13. Joe Cribb, "Constructing Kushan Chronology - Reassessing

Numismatic Evidence', X1Vth International Numismatic Congress, Glasgow, Aug 31st - Sept 4th, 2009 14. Robert Goébl, "Dokumente zur Geschichte der Iranischen Hunnen in

Baktrien und Indien" (Otto Harassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1967) 15. Nikolaus Schindel, "Ardashir IJ Kushanshah and Huviska the

Kushan: Numismatic Evidence for the Date of the Kushan King, Kanishka I', JONS 198, pp. 12-14 (2009) 16. Robert Bracey, "Review 2007: Publications on India, Central Asia,

Pakistan and the Kushans"'; published on the website: <https://www.kushan.org>

17. Hans Loeschner, "A new Oesho/Shiva image of Sasanian 'Peroz'

taking power in the northern part of the Kushan empire". JONS 192, pp. 22-24 (2007)

18. Hans Loeschner, "Notes on the Yuezhi - Kushan Relationship and

Kushan Chronology", website of the Oriental Numismatic Society (April 15, 2008): <https://www.onsnumis.org>

19. Hans Loeschner, "The Glory of Kanishka the Great in context with the

Historical Buddha and Kushana Chronology', t.b.p. (Aryan Books Intl., New Delhi) in "Proceedings of the Intl. Seminar on Kushana Glory ع‎ Its Contemporary Challenges', editor Professor Vidula Jayaswal (Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi)