# GEORGIAN-HULAGID CHRISTIAN

# DIRHEMS by Michael Mitchiner

In 2008, Paghava, Gvindjilia and Kudin published an interesting

paper in the Journal of the ONS on the early Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams. In their paper, the authors made a plea for the publication of additional specimens, with accompanying illustrations, in order to clarify the sequence of issues. The month

and year of issue inscribed in the segments of the reverse margin are often poorly written and difficult to interpret. With this in mind, a further sixteen coins are catalogued below, together with a reference ما‎ another coin, which was not noticed in their paper. The historical context for these interesting issues has been covered in the previous paper, so it is not repeated. They did not cite the readings of the main inscriptions, so Lang's (1955) readings are cited here.

One of the coin types published in this paper is new. This is

the dirhem of Arghiin without his name in Persian. Earlier dirhems of this series bear an obverse design showing a five-line Mongol legend. This format is continued on the new type of Arghiin dirhem published here. Although this coin has a clearly written month of issue (Sha'aban), the year of issue is unfortunately effaced. The earliest dirhems in Arghun's name listed by Paghava et al. bear the year 683, with month missing. Subsequent issues were dated from Muharram 684 onwards. These coins (in default of any contrary comment) presumably bear

the published obverse design used on Arghiin's other known coins. It is a four-line Mongol inscription, plus Arghiin's name written below in Persian. This is the type of the last four coins catalogued below.

With regard to the other coins catalogued, there are a few additions to the month-year combinations published by Paghava et al. The first three coins seem to emphasise the concept gleaned

from the number of references cited by Paghava et al. that there

was a major minting of posthumous Abaga coins during 1857" alAkhir 681. Abaga's lifetime coins in this series are dated 680 (nearly all) and 67x (one reference). He died in Dhu'l-Hijjah 680

(1 April 1282). There was an interregnum until Ahmad Tegudar (Takudar) was recognised on 26 Muharram 681 (6 May 1282). Throughout the remainder of 681 and also during 682, dirhems were issued posthumously in the name of Abaga, and some later

issues were also struck in Abaga's name. The only reference to a

coin of Ahmad dated 681 is accompanied by a question mark. Although a clearer specimen is desirable, the reading \|68)1 appears to be correct for the first of Ahmad's coins catalogued

here. The year \[68\]2 is clear on the other coin. Most of Ahmad's

known coins were issued during AH 683, with few confirmed for 682. The rationale underlying the posthumous Abaga coinage (perhaps issued until the beginning of Arghiin's reign) has not

been clarified, Concerning some of the months listed in this paper,

the months Sha'aban and Ramadan are not listed in the table by Paghava et al. Most of the month-date readings cited below are reasonably clear, but a few are provisional and should be considered alongside the illustrations.

Abaga. Cross symbol Obverse: Five-line Mongol inscription

gaghanu (of the Khaqan) / nereber (in the name) / abagha-yin (by Abagha) / deletkeguluk / sen (struck) Reverse: Christian inscription in Arabic

bism al-ab (In the name of the Father) / w'al-ibn wa riih (and the

Son and the Spirit) / al-quds alah (the Holiness God) / wa ahad (and One) + Cross-symbol

There is a compressed word above the "bism" of the Christian legend, which Lang did not notice. It can be read "sarmad",

meaning "Eternal". This prefix occurs on nearly all Christian dirhems, but on the last coin catalogued below (no. 16) it is

replaced by three stars. The translation of the Christian legend can

be amended to read: "For ever. In the name of the Father and the Son and the Spirit; the Holy: God and One". This is a clear statement of the Christian doctrine of the Holy Trinity.

1. Rab' al-Akhir, year \[68\]1. Silver, die axes 12, 22 mm, 2.27  2. Rabi' al-Akhir, year 681. Silver, die axes 6, 2\] mm, 2.42 g

3. Rabi' al-Akhir, year 6\[8\]1. Silver, die axes 5,21 mm, 2.43 g

4. Jumada al-Akhir, year \[68\]1. Silver, die axes 1, 22 mm, 2.46 g

5. Sha'aban \[6\]81. Silver, die axes 7, 22 mm, 2.47  g

6. (month lost), year 6\[8\]1. Silver, die axes 6, 22 mm, 2.46 g
7. Rabi' al-Akhir, year 6\[8\]2. Silver, die axes 11, 21 mm, 2.31 g Note: A similar dirhem, at that time in the collection of Nicholas Rhodes, published by Mitchiner (1977, 2386) is dated: (month lost), year \[6\]82

8. Sha'aban, year 6xx. Silver, die axes 10, 22 mm, 2.32 g pees

9. Ramadan, year 6xx. Silver, die axes 5, 22 mm, 2.45 g

Ahmad Teguder. Star symbol Obverse: Five-line Mongol inscription

gaghanu (of the Khaqan) / nereber (in the name) / amadun (by Ahmad) / deletkeguluk / sen (struck) Reverse: Same Christian legend + Star symbol

10. (month lost), year \[68\]1. Silver, die axes 7, 22 mm, 2.45 gm

11. (month lost), year \[68\]2. Silver, die axes 2, 22 mm, 2.42 gm

Arghiin. Cross symbol. No Persian name Obverse: Five-line Mongol inscription

Qaghanu (of the Khagan) /nereber (in the name) / Arghunu (by Arghun) / deletkeguluk / sen (struck) Reverse: Same Christian legend + Cross symbol

12. Sha'aban, year 6xx. Silver, die axes 12, 21 mm, 2.39 g

Arghiin. Cross symbol. Normal type with Persian name Obverse: Four-line Mongol inscription, plus fifth line in Persian

qaghanu (of the Khagan) /nereber (in the name) / arghunu (by

Arghun) / deletkegulk (struck) / Arghun Reverse: Same Christian legend + Cross symbol The Mongol legend sometimes reads Arghunun in place of Arghunu

13. Rabi' al-Akhir, year \]68\[5. Silver, die axes 12, 21 mm, 2.53 g

14. Jumada al-Akhir, year \[68\]5. Silver, die axes 6, 21 mm, 2.38 g

15. ShawwéAl, year \[68\]5. Silver, die axes 5, 22 mm, 2.45 gm The top margin could, alternatively, be read: Sanat khams (year \[68\]5)

16. Dhu'l-Hijjah, year 6xx. Silver, die axes 10, 22 mm, 2.41 gm References

Lang, D. M., Studies in the numismatic history of Georgia in Transcaucasia, Numismatic Notes and Monographs no. 130, American Numismatic Society, New York, 1955

Mitchiner, M., Oriental coins and their values. The World of Islam, Hawkins Publications, London 1977

Paghava, I., Gvindjilia, Z. and Kudin, S., Star in lieu of cross: notes on

the early Georgian-Khulagid Christian dirhams, JONS 196, Summer 2008,

7-15