# DINARS AND HISTORY OF BADR AL-DIN

# LU'LU' OF MOSUL

## By Yahya Jafar

This article attempts to illustrate some of the history of Badr alDin,"ها‎ and his son, Ismail in Mosul, through the study of his

dinars, during an interesting period of the Abbasid's fourth and last period. The dinars's are presented with a prefix "Zg" to

denote a Zengid dinar and "Lu" to denote a Luluid dinar, followed by "Mo" to denote Mosul, followed by its hijri date plus

a suffix, if more than one coin is shown for a particular date.

The coinage of Li'li' is diverse, consisting of gold dinars, an ample copper coinage presumably of dirhem denomination and

some scarce silver coinage. Generally, the attributions on the dinars provide the most significant political information as, unlike

other denominations which are usually minted for local use, the dinars travel as payment of dues and in trade. Therefore, this article is limited to the dinars minted during the rule of the Lu'li'ids in Mosul, that is Badr al-Din Lii'li' and his son, Isma 'il.

It is not clear when, where or at what age Nir al-Din Arsalan Shah I (AH 589-607) acquired Lili', who was an Armenian slave; nevertheless, it appears that he quickly rose to the highest position of power in Mosul, when his master entrusted him,

amongst other important administrative positions, with the command of the Zangid army. It further appears that Arsalan Shah I was an ailing ruler, at least, towards the end of his rule and, presumably by then Lili' exercised considerable power in Mosul.

Thus, he may have been instrumental in the decision of the Zengid king to nominate his young son, Mas'id, to succeed him,

to be followed by his son Zengi. Hence, when Nur al-Din died, his

young son, Masud, with the help of Li'lt', smoothly, assumed

power in Mosul and his brother, Zengi, was given the rule of the

fortress of al-Aqr. Li'li' quickly obtained the Abbasid caliph, alNasir li din Allah's (AH 575-622) approval, giving Mas'iid the title "al-Malik al-Qahir', for the transition, and considering the new ruler's age, nominating Li'li' to be his administrator. This acknowledgment by the caliph allowed Lu'lw' to practically rule Mosul from then on. Although, officially, Badr al-Din Li'li's rule

in Mosul began in 631, he was the effective ruler there from the

death of his master, Nir al-Din Arsalan Shah I b. Mas'iid b. Mawdid b. Zangi in 607.

It appears that it was during the rule of Arsalan Shah I that the Zengids chose to nominate patrons on their dinars, starting with the Ayyubid king, al-Malik al-'Adil Abii Bakr b. Ayytib From

then on, different patrons appeared on the coinage of Mosul, depending on the balance of power at the time as well as lapses when Lili' felt strong enough to mint independent dinars without showing any patron.

With the dwindling power of the Seljuks of Iraq, various

independent Atabeg principalities arose in the north of Iraq, notably those of Mosul and Irbil, which was then ruled by

' His full name has been given as "Al-Malik al-Raheem Abu'! Fadhl Badr al-Din Lulu b. Abd Allah al- Nawari, al-Rumi al-Atabiki". This suggests

that his father's name was "Abd Allah", which may also refer to an arbitrary person as the name means "Servant of God" which is given to

describe almost anyone and thus it may, probably, indicate that his father

was unknown. Further, "al-Nawari" may relate to "Nawar' which means "Gypsies", that is, he is of gypsy origins. Likewise, "al-Rumi" indicates

that he is from Rum and "al-Atabaki" indicates that he is, or belongs to, the "Atabegs".

2 Before the occupation of Baghdad in 656h by the Mongols, all these dinars had an outer obverse margin citing the Quranic(IX,33) and an outer

reverse margin citing the Quranic (XXX,4-5) after which date these were

reversed; these then will not be stated in the description of the coins.

Images are shown for the dinar numbers with an asterisk(\*) all of which are in the writer's collection.

3 These coinage of the Zengids and Luluids are aptly dealt with by Spengler and Sayles.

Muzaffar al-Din Kokburi b. 'Ali. Before his death, Arsalan Shah I,

in an effort to strengthen ties with Kokburi, arranged the

marriages of two of the latter's daughters to his sons, Mas'iid and Zengi. Kokburt, as the father in-law of the new ruler Mas'iid, had

designs for Mosul and tried to exert much influence there. As

such, he was highly suspicious of Li' li''s schemes and ambitious behavior, becoming his most dangerous enemy. Moreover, the

presence of the Ayyubids in Syria, the Rum Seljuks in the north

and the Khwarizmshahs in the east meant that Li'li' had to navigate carefully and wisely in order to safeguard Mosul and his interests.

Before his death in Rabr'II, 615, al-Malik al-Qahir Mas'id

nominated his son, Arsalan Shah II, as his successor, instead of his brother, Zengi, a move, most probably, initiated by Li'li'. Thus,

when Mas'tid died, Li'li' quickly obtained caliphal approval and

placed the young Arsalan Shah on the throne of Mosul. Zengi and Kokburi, together began invading the territories of Mosul. However, Lilt' must have kept very good relationships with the Ayyubids and the Abbasid caliph in Baghdad, both of whom

reprimanded and threatened Kokburi to end such actions against Lili' who, by now, had become the undisputed ruler of Mosul.

The young Arslan Shah did not last long - he died in 616 - and his three-year old brother, Mahmiid, was declared sultan by Li' li'

and placed on the Zengid throne in Mosul. This, naturally, invited

disapproval and threatening action by both the new Sultan's uncle, Zengi, who considered himself to be the rightful successor, as well

as the Sultan's maternal grandfather, Kokburi who may have

guessed Li'li''s ultimate aims to usurp power for himself. Again,

the Ayyubid ruler supported Li'li' and thwarted any actions against him.

Surprisingly, Kokburi, when he visited the Abbasid caliph, al-

Mustansir bi-Allah (623-640), in Baghdad in 628 bequeathed the principality of Irbil to the caliph after his death. In doing so, Kokburi may have either tried to encourage the caliph to annex Mosul as well, or ensured a caliphal presence in the vicinity of Mosul, to act as protector for his grandson and, perhaps, the continuation of the dynasty. Therefore, when Kokburi died in 630,

the caliph, after minor resistance, took control of Irbil and annexed it to his realm.

\{It appears that the existence of Zengi and Kokburi were the

major obstacle preventing Lilt' from deposing the young Zengid king of Mosul and acquiring power for himself, for as soon as Kokburi and Zengi died in 630, the young Mahmiid was put to

death and Lili' declared himself Sultan of Mosul in 631.

I will try to show that numismatic evidence suggests a

transition of power to Lili' may have not been smooth and that, initially, caliphal approval for his inauguration may have been difficult.

Nevertheless, the caliph al-Mustansir eventually approved the nomination of Lili' as the Atabeg and Sultan of Mosul,

probably, as a result of Li'li''s good relations with the Abbasid caliphs, and the intervention of the Ayyubids.

This article will examine the Zengid dinars from 606, that

being the effective date of Li'li''s control of Mosul, to the end of

the Li'li'id dynasty in 660, and attempt to describe his various alliances during the different phases of this period through the

attributions appearing on the dinars. Moreover, although it is possible that either Zengid or Li'li'id dinars from mints in other

than Mosul between 606 and 660, could appear in the future, the author is unaware of any at present.

Nir al-Din Arsalan Shah I b. Mas'iid b. Mawdiid b. Zengi (589-607)

The first dinar described is dated 606. Since Arsalan Shah was

reported to be very ill prior to his death in 607, it is reasonable to

assume that Li'lt' had assumed effective power by then and as

such minted dinars in the name of his master, which this dinar affirms.
1\*. Zg.Mo.606 - Arsalan Shah + al-'Adil + al-Nasir 25mm, 3.10g

# العادل بن ودومد

# p‏ محمد رسول الله لاله ‏ هللاالا \_

# صلى الله عليه 3 ل وحده لاشريك له أ

#.‏C نيدلاو ايندلا رون 1, © الناصر لدين الله

# باتاك نالسراهاش امير نمؤملاني

# بن ايوب

The above dinar mentions the Ayyubid, al-Malik al-'Adil Saif alDin Abii Bakr b. Ayyiib (592-615h) the ruler of Syria and Egypt

as well as Arsalan Shah's name and title together with the Abbasid caliph's name, al-Nasir li-Din Allah (575-622h). As

mentioned before, Arsalan Shah dicd in Rajab 607h and was succeeded by his son Izz al-Din Mas'id.

Al-Malik al-Qahir Izz al-Din Mas'id II b. Arsalan Shah (607- 615h).

2\*.78.110.607 - وملا‎ "110 + al-'Adil + al-Nasir

# 28mm, 6.20g ا الامام‎

# \_ محمد رسول الله‎

= هلاال هللا الا ‎  ١. 3 وحده لاشريك له‎ F 9 صلى الله عليه‎ £ \> اهتدلازع و - الناصر لدي ا‎ d ented

It was customary to seek the caliph's approval whenever a new ruler was inaugurated and, thus, Li'li' obtained the caliph alNasir's approval for Mas'iid's succession and, in view of Mas'iid's youth and illness, Li'lt' was nominated his administrator. On the above dinar, additionally, the caliph's title "al-Imam" is shown which usually only occurred on the coinage of Madinat al-Salam.

# 608h

3\*, Zg.Mo.608 - Mas 'iid + Abu Bakr (al-'Adil ) + al-Nasir 27mm, 5.93g.

# ار سلان شاه

الامام ee‏ لاله الا الله 3 صنى الله عليه > وحده لاشريك له

# عز ‏llasU " الناصر لدين الله

# والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

4. Zg.Mo.609 - Mas 'iid + al-'Adil + al-Nasir 27.5mm, 5.88g Hennequin CCXLI. As dinar no. (2) except for the date.

5\*, Zg.Mo.610 - Mas 'iid + al-'Adil + al-Nasir 28mm, 6.86g. As no. (2) except for the date.

# 611h

6\*. Zg.Mo.611 - Mas'iid + al-'Adil + al-Nasir 27mm, 6.31g. As no. (2) except for the date.

## ع1 \|
7\*, Zg.Mo.612 - Mas'iid + al-'Adil + al-Nasir 27mm, 7.04g. As no. (2) except for the date.

9\*, Zg.Mo.614 - Mas'iid + al-'Adil + al-Nasir 28mm, 6.61g. Appears as no. (2) except for the date, with the name of Mas'iid missing on the reverse.

The above show the variations of dinars which Mas'id minted. Despite the differing formats, they essentially carry the same information, This lasted until his death at the end of Rabi\* Awwal 615. The Caliph sent emissaries to Mosul offering condolences

and confirming Mas'td's ten year old son Arsalan Shah as his successor and maintaining Lii'li' as his administrator.

Nar al-Din Arsalan Shah II b. Mas'iid b. Arsalan Shah I (615 - 616h)

10\*. Zg.Mo.615 - Arsalan Shah II + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alNasir, 28mm, 7.12g

# بن يدلازعن الامام

# محمد رسول الله = لاله الا الله ا

# ‏F للاىلصه عليه \*1 ‏E رحده لاشريك له ‏A

# \> نور الدنيا والدين ‏J" الناصر لدين الله

# كباتا ارسلان 4. امير نمؤملاني

# ' بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة خمسة عشر ئامتسوة

Mas'id was succeeded by his sons, each of whom had been given

areas to rule in his lifetime, e.g. al-Malik al-Kamil Muhammed in Egypt and al-Malik al-Ashraf Misa, who ruled all areas of Jazirat Bani Omar and Miyafargin. Therefore, Li'li' renewed his

allegiances to these two kings, being the most powerful of the brothers. In fact. when Arsalén Shah assumed power. his uncle Zengi objected and, with the help of Kukbari, occupied some citadels that belonged to Mosul. Li'li' resorted to al-Ashraf for

help. Both Zangi and Kokburi were reprimanded and new terms of

peace, witnessed by the caliph's emissaries, were dictated and Lili' recovered what was taken from him,

After a short reign, the sickly Arsalan Shah died in 616h and was succeeded by his three year old brother, Nir al-Din Mahmid. Again, Lili' quickly obtained the caliph's approval for this succession as well as Lii'lii's role as administrator.

Nasir al-Din Mahmid b. Mas'id II b. Arsalan Shah I (616 - 631h)

11. Zg.Mo.616 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf  + al-Kamil + al-Ndasir 29mm, 6.75g, Hennequin CCLVIII.

# الامام

# 3 لااله الا الله

# ‏F وحده yalA" ‏tp الناصر لدين الله

## الكا

## Cyl 'gall امبر‎

# لملاك

# ‏e محمد رسول الله & هللاىلص عليه 7 ناصر نيدلا 3

# & باتاك بن يدلازعن

## بن

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة ست عشرة ئامتسوة

12. Zg.Mo.617 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf  + al-Kamil + al-Ndasir 27mm, 5.70g

# ١‏

امالم ayay 6‏ 3 = وحده لاشريك له ‏F" الناصر لدين الله

# امير نمؤملاني

# عز يدلان

# محمد رسول الله

13. Zg.Mo.619A - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf  + al-Kamil + al-Nasir

27.5mm, 5.71g, Hennequin CCLIX. As no. (12) except for the date.

14\*, Zg.Mo.619B - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-Nasir + Abii Nasr, 29mm, 7.65¢

# والدين ابو

## ‏E لااله الا الله

# 3 وحده لاشريك له الناصر لدين الله

# امير نمؤملاني

# الكامل

# F محمد رسول الله‎ f&. صلى الله عليه‎ ناصر ايندلانيدلاو

# باتاك ومحمد
15\*, Zg.Mo.620A - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-Nasir + Abii Nasr, 28mm, 5.59g. As no. (14) except for the date.

16. Zg.Mo.620B - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf  + al-Kamil + al-Nasir + Abii Nasr. 29.5mm, 5.81g. Hennequin CCLXI.

# الكامل

والدين ابو محمد هللالوسر و 'E‏ لاله الا الله 1

# ‏F للاىلصه

عليه 0 © الهدحوهلكيرش ‏j ناصر يدلان ‏ 3 هللا نيدل رصانلا

# كباتا دومحم 00 لملاك امير نمؤملاني

17\*, Zg.Mo.621 - Mahmud + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-Nasir + Abii Nasr, 27mm, 2.22g. As no. (14) except for the date.

The dinars of Nasir al-Din Mahmiid remained essentially the same

as his predecessor in that it showed his alliances with the Ayyubid kings, al-Ashraf and al-Kamil, together with the customary tribute

to the Abbasid caliph, al-Nasir. However, from 619h, perhaps

even a year earlier, the dinars additionally, and unusually, cited

the name of the heir, Abi Nasr Muhammad, who had been

appointed in 585h and appeared on the Abbasid coinage of alNasir until 601h when his status was revoked. However, he was

again re-instated as heir in 618h. It is reported that caliph al-Nasir, towards the end of his long reign, had become very ill and blind,

in which case it is likely that the heir, Abi Nasr, may have acted

as the effective ruler and Li'li''s gesture of inscribing his name

on the coinage of Mosul represented an early allegiance to him.

After forty-seven years, representing the longest reign of any Abbasid caliph, the caliph, al-Nasir li-Din Allah, died at the end of Ramadan 622h and was succeeded by his son, Abi Nasr

Muhammad, who became Caliph al-Zahir bi Amr-Allah (622623h).

18. Zg.Mo.622 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf  + al-Kamil + al-Zahir 30mm, 4.87, Kazan 1035.

# بن

وعسمد ‏op مصة E Maes‏ هلاال الا الله 25 صلى الله عليه عأ وحده لاشريك له 6

# لارصانايند و يدلان رهاظلارماب الله

# )‏LLA ومحمد امير نمؤملاني

19\*, Zg.Mo.623A - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-Zahir. 28mm, 4.01g. As no.(18) except for the date.

There were essentially no changes in the format of the dinars of Mosul except substituting the name of the new caliph, al-Zahir, for that of al-Nasir.

Al-Zahir lasted only ten months as caliph and died in mid Rajab 623h, he was succeeded by his son, Abu-Ja'far, who became Caliph al-Mustansir bi-Allah.

## 'Sh

623h-B 20\*. Zg.Mo.623B - Mahmid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir, 29mm, 4.20.

# الامام

# لااله

الا الله وحده لاشريك ل4 لارصانايند و يدلان نتسملارص للابه

# باتاك ومحمد بن امير تموملاخي

# مسشعود

# محمد رسول الله

## ماكلاال

## ص

21\*. Zg.Mo.624 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir. 27mm, 6.77g. As no.(20) except for the date.

## 626h-A

22\*. Zg.Mo.626A - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + لله‎ Mustansir, 27.5mm, 10.35g.

# الامام وعسمد laF ‏5 3 محمد رسول الله 4,J ‏enoddo

# ‏١ صلىلله عليه 2 © هلكيرشالهدحو \[

# والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني
# 626h-B

23\*. Zg.Mo.626B - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir, 27mm, 6.92g. As no.(20) except for the date.

# 627h

24\*. Zg.Mo.627 - Mahmid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir. 27.5mm, 4.56g. As no.(24) except for the date.

25\*, Zg.Mo.628 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-

Mustansir. 27mm, 6.10g. As no.(22) except for the date. a

26\*. Zg.Mo.629A - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir, 26.5mm, 6.67g. As no.(22) except for the date and "bin" is now before "Mas'iid".

27\*, Zg.Mo.629B - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir, 28mm, 5.14g. As no.(20) except for the date.

28. Zg.Mo.629C - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-

Mustansir + Abi Ja 'far. 28mm, 6.02g, Hennequin CCLXVII.

# بن وعسمد 5 مامالا

# & شعمة

ثلا لويس ¢ لاهلالللااه ب وحده لاشريك له ٠‏ صلى الله عليه والدين باتاك

## لملاك الكامل

# ITIP ا‎

Most unusually, the kunya of the caliph, al-Mustansir, which is Abii Ja'far, appears on the obverse of the above dinar, perhaps

meant as extra flattery to the caliph as it was well known that Li'li', throughout his administration and rule, always tried to

maintain excellent relations with the Abbasid caliphs. This appears to be a single year phenomenon.

29\*, Zg.Mo.630 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir. 24.5mm, 5.89g. As no.(26) except for the date.

As mentioned earlier, in an unprecedented move, Kokburi arrived

in Baghdad in 630h and was granted audience with the caliph,

who bestowed on him lavish titles and presents. Kokburi then

bequeathed Irbil to the caliph after his death. In doing so, he

perhaps sought the caliph's help to protect his grandchild, Mahmid, in Mosul, or even add Mosul to his territory, and thus

deny Li'lt' his ambitions. Kokburi died in Ramadan 630h and,

after limited resistance, the Abbasid forces occupied and controlled Irbil.

30\*. Zg.Mo.631 - Mahmiid + al-Ashraf + al-Kadmil + alMustansir. 28mm, 7.30g. As no.(26) except for the date.

When both Kokburi and Zangi died in 630, Li'li' saw the removal of both obstacles to replacing Mahmiid, who simply

vanished in 631, reputedly locked up in a room without food or

water until his death. Mahmitid's death marked the end of the Atabeg Zengid rule of Mosul.

Al-Malik al-Rahim Badr al-Din Lili' (631 - 657h)

Although Li'lt' declared himself the king of Mosul as soon as Mahmiid disappeared, it is interesting to note that, while the copper coinage of Li'li' dated 631 is plentiful, dinars of 631 and are virtually non-cxistent. Though copper coinage is

considered a local issue not requiring caliphal approval for their production, gold dinars do. It is thus suggested that their abnormal

absence may have been the result of caliphal disapproval of Li'li's acquisition of power by denying him, initially, the

necessary approval to produce dinars. However, it is not until 633

that dinars of Lili' appeared, signifying the reaching of an agreement with the caliph. After that, Li'lii's dinars are readily available for most years until his death in 657. Moreover, it is noticeable that the early dinars are somewhat larger in diameter

than earlier Zengid issues in order to attract the attention of the populace to them and promote the new information that they announced. --- 31\*. Lu.Mo.633 - Lit 31.5mm, 8.33g. 'li' + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al-Mustansir

# لولو الام

| 5محمد رسول الله35 | 5هلاال | الاالله5 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| ‏Eصلى الله عليه | ع | ‏EFوحده لاشريكله ‏A |
| بدر الدنيا | نتسملارص | للابه |
| 34h-A | 32\*. Lu.Mo.634A - Lili' + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + al- | Mustansir. 31mm, 4.84g. As no.(31) except for the date. |
| 33, Lu.Mo.634B - Li'/u' + al-Kamil + al-Mustansir | 28mm, 4.01g, Hennequin CCXCV, as no.(32) but without "al- | Malik al-Ashraf. |

# ‏E صلى الله عليه ع ‏EF وحده لاشريك له ‏A

# بدر الدنيا نتسملارص للابه

34h-A 32\*. Lu.Mo.634A - Lili' + al-Ashraf + al-Kamil + alMustansir. 31mm, 4.84g. As no.(31) except for the date.

33, Lu.Mo.634B - Li'/u' + al-Kamil + al-Mustansir 28mm, 4.01g, Hennequin CCXCV, as no.(32) but without "alMalik al-Ashraf.

34, Lu.Mo.635A - Lit'lii' + al-Kamil + al-Mustansir 29.5mm, 4.37g, Hennequin CXCVI, similar to no.(33) except for

the date. Lili' maintained his relationship with the Ayyubid kings. However, although the chronicles report the death of al-Malik alAshraf in Muharram 635, his name is omitted one year earlier, as

on the dinar no.33. Either he actually died in 634 or he was weakened by illness, thus negating the need to include his name

on the latter part of 634h, or the mint simply erroneously used\_ the obverse die of the previous year.

In Rajab 635, al-Malik al-Kamil also died and the loss of these two powerful Ayyubid kings at about the same time left a power vacuum, resulting in a struggle for supremacy in the Ayyubid

house. Under these circumstances, Lili' preferred to remain

neutral without involving himself in the ensuing struggle between

the various feuding Ayyubid princes and, hence, struck his

subsequent dinars without any reference to an overlord, as can be seen on the following few issues.

35. Lu.Mo.635B - Lii'lii' + al-Mustansir, 32mm, 10.06g.

# لو لى الامام

# محمد رسول الله لااله الا الله صلى الله عليه وحده لاشريك له

# ركن الدنيا نتسملارص للابه

# والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

36. Lu.Mo.636 - آل‎  '111' + al-Mustansir 30mm, 8.06g, Hennequin CCXCVIIC, similar to no. (35) except for the date.

37\*, Lu.Mo.637A - Lii'lii' + al-Mustangsir 30mm, 7.20g. As no. (35) except for the date.

38\*, Lu.Mo.637B - Li'l' + Kaykhusrii + al-Mustansir 28mm, 5.41g. اطلسلان الامام

# الاعظم غياث

لااله الا الله الدنيا والد وحده لاشريك له 'e.‏ 1 5 ين كيخسرو محمد رسول الله

## )GLA llap" ‏g امير eiroC ‏llag'

The struggle for supremacy had necessarily weakened the Ayyubid house, perhaps even rendering them unsuitable for an alliance with Lt'lt', who needed a strong ally to thwart attempts of the Khwarizmshahs to occupy Mosul. Thus, Lili' formed a new alliance with the Rum Seljuk sultan, Kaykhusrt II (634643h), and struck his dinars citing his name on the coinage,

starting from 637. It is likely that the subsequent independent dinar (no. 40) of 638 is probably a mint error.

39\*, Lu.Mo.638A - Li'lii' + al-Mustansir 29mm, 7.43g. As no.(35) except for the date.
40\*. Lu.Mo.638B - Lia'lii' + Kaykhusrii + al-Mustansir 27mm, 6.02.

# لو لو "السلطا ‏ELB الامام

# ان oie‏ 5 الدنيا والد لااله الا الله ين كب 0 و وحده لاشربا بك 4

# بدر الدنيا

نتسملارص هللا لؤسز دمحم للابه والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

# بسم الله ضر ب هذا انيدلار asa ‏sllag سنة ثمان و يثلثن و ستمائة

41\*, Lu.Mo.639 - Li'l' + Kaykhusrii + al-Mustansir 31mm, 7.74g. As no.(40) except for the date, while the word "aldin" is engraved as a single word in the third line of the reverse.

42\*, Lu.Mo.640 - Li'la' + Kaykhusrii + al-Musta'sim 27mm, 7.23g.

# ‏gA الامام

# ‏cC هللا لوسر دمحم 7 ‏eww

## 5 صلى الله عليه. 9 sa ‏LO

# =بدر

‏lai \> ستمملام )seo ‏ya والدين باتاك نمؤملاني

43\*, Lu.Mo.641 - ادا‎ '\[1\* + Kaykhusrii + al-Musta'sim

28.5mm, 7.66g. As no.(42) except for the date.

# ‏ly الامام ممصي سيول الا ' = لاله الا الله

# 'A‏ 3

- -: عتسملامص هل كيرشال هدحو للابه والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

44\*, Lu.Mo.642A - \*11\['اشا‎ + Kaykhusrii + al-Musta'sim 30mm, 6.97g. Same as no.(43) except for date and.... رانيدلا‎.....المبارك‎

45\*, Lu.Mo.642B - Li'lii' + Kaykhusrti + al-Musta'sim 27mm, 6.84¢.

# لو لى‎ ١‏ الامام محمد رسول الله 0

## ° 5 مصحعتسملا sly‏ "© والدين كباتا.

#.امير نمؤملاني

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة اثنتين يعبراون ئامتسوة

It is reported that Lili' adopted a conciliatory policy towards the Mongols, who started to appear on the scene around that time. He

apparently established good relationships with them that included collecting dues on their behalf from the rulers of the minor principalities in the area; all this, presumably, in order to avoid

their interference in Mosul. Perhaps this led him to describe some
of the dinars issued in 642 and 643 as "al-dinar al-mubarak" - the blessed dinar!

# 643h-A

46\*. Lu.Mo.643A - Lii'lii' + Kaykhusrii + al-Musta 'sim 26mm, 5.29g. As no. (43) except for the date.

The Rum Seljuk armies were defeated by the Mongols in the battle of Kose Dag between Sivas and Erzinjan in 641 and the Rum sultan, Kaykhusrii, escaped and died a couple of years later.

It is not clear why Li'li' continued to strike dinars in his name until 643.

# 643h-B

47\*, Lu.Mo.643B - Lit'lii' + al-Musta'sim, 27.5mm, 5.67g. As no. (43) except for the date plus "al-dinar al-mubarak" in the mint- date formula.

# 643h-C \_

48\*, Lu.Mo.643C - Lit'\]i' + al-Musta'sim, 27.5mm, 7.44g

# لو لو الامام

# محمد رسول الله لااله الا الله صلى الله عليه وحده لاشريك له

# ركن الدنيا عتسملامص للابه

# والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

With the Ayyubid house still feuding, the Rum Seljuks defeated by the Mongols and the Khwarizmshahs also defeated by a combined regional army, Li'li' must have felt confident enough

not to become anyone's subordinate and thus issued dinars without mentioning a protector.

49\*, Lu.Mo.644 - Li'li' + al-Musta'sim, 28.5mm, 6.01g. As no. (48) except for the date.

50\*. Lu.Mo.645 - Li'l' + al-Musta'sim, 28mm, 6.005. As no. (48) except for the date.

51. Lu.Mo.646 - Li'/ai' +  al-Malik al-Ndsir + al-Musta'sim, 28.5mm, 5.43g, Hennequin CCCIV.

| لو لى | الامام |
|:--- |:--- |
| محمد رسول الله | ‏ynaالا الله |
| 5صلى الله عليه2وحده | لاشريك له |
| =دلانكراين1عتسملامص | للابه |

# محمد رسول الله ‏yna الا الله

# 5 صلى الله عليه 2 وحده لاشريك له

# = دلانكراين 1 عتسملامص للابه

# والدين ‏ULA امبر المه ‏ekas(

Meanwhile, the Ayyubid, al-Malik al-Nasir Yisuf II, the lord of Halab, occupied Hims and posed a threat to Mosul. The above dinar cites al-Malik al-Nasir, suggesting that Li'li', in order to

protect himself, had become his vassal. This corresponds with the chronicles, which indicate that Li'li' had the khutba in Mosul read in the name of the Ayyubid, al-Nasir.

# 647h.

52. Lu.Mo.647 - Li'lit' + al-Saleh + al-Musta'sim 27mm, 4.23¢.

# Lay\}

5 م "7 t‏ 0 1 محمد رسول الله 2 ‏yna الا الله = صلى الله عليه.3 وحده لاشريك له

# 5 ايندلا نكر 3 عتسملامص للابه

# والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

# بسم اللد ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة سبع يعبراون ئامتسوة

Al-Malik al-Saleh, lord of Damascus and Egypt, was suspicious of al-Nasir's increasing powers and thus contacted Li'li' in order to help him raise a combined army against al-Nasir. The dinar above

attests to this alliance as Lili' appears to have dropped al-Nasir in favor of al-Saleh. However, the campaign against al-Nasir failed. Moreover, it appears that the death of al-Saleh in Sha'ban

647 and the subsequent take-over and control of Egypt by the Bahri Mamluks complicated matters for al-Nasir who, by now the

lord of Damascus, was planning to raise an army in order to regain Egypt and thus he needed all the support he could muster. Therefore, it was probably not too difficult for Li'li' to reach an

agreement by sending emissaries to al-Nasir, striking a deal and

entering under his protection once again. Thus the following
dinars of Lili' re-established the citing of al-Nasir on the coinage of Mosul and it remained so until the fall of Baghdad in 656.

53\*. Lu.Mo.648 - Li'la' + al-Musta 'sim, 26.5mm, 5.44g. As no. (48) except for the date. wee

54\*, Lu.Mo.649 - Li'/i' + al-Nasir + al-Musta'sim 27.5mm, 4.72. As no. (51) except for the date. <-

# 650h

555. Lu.Mo.650 - 111 \|11\* + al-Nasir Yasuf + al-Musta'sim 27mm, 4.59.

# لو لو الامام سردمحمهللالو, لاله الا الله

# ‏E صلى الله عليه و سلم 4 وحده لاشريك له

# = ركن الدنيا عتسملامص ‏eld

# 20-2 والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

56. Lu.Mo.651 - Li'lu' + al-Nasir Yiisuf  + al-Musta'sim 26mm, 5.93g, Hennequin CCCVIIB.

# لو لو الامام

# § محمد لالوسرهل. لاله الا الله

# نغ صلى الله عليه 9 وحده لاشريك له

# = ركن الدنيا عتسملامص للابه والدين باتاك امير نمؤملاني

57\*, Lu.Mo.652 - Li'l' + al-Nasir Yiisuf+ al-Musta'sim

25.5mm, 5.04g. As no. (56) except for the date

Based on, what I think to be, a suspect reading by the late Dr al-

Husaini of the date on a Lili'id dinar in the Cairo Islamic Museum', probably mistaking a "six" for a "two", he concluded

that Li'li' had struck dinars in the name of the khan, Minku, as

early as 652h and omitting the name of the Abbasid caliph. This

information had been accepted and referred to by several

researchers, however, it is highly unlikely for the following reasons:-

1. It is unlikely that La'li' would drop the name of the Abbasid caliph from whom he derived his legitimacy as a ruler, in favour of the IIkhans at a time when they were still just raiding parties.

2. It is unlikely that Lilt' could have predicted that the IIkhans° would, if they defeated the Abbasid armies, abolish the

Abbasid dynasty as, at best, it would have been thought at the time

that they would rule leaving religious matters to the caliph as

earlier rulers such as the Buwayhids and the Seljuks had done.

3. It would have been very odd that Li'li' would produce such

a dinar as a "one-off" when in the same year his dinars carried the

names of the Abbasid caliph as well as that of the Ayyubid alNasir Yisuf, as he had done for every year from 649 to 656.

58\*, Lu.Mo.653 - Lili' + al-Nasir Yiisuf + al-Musta'sim 27.5mm, 4.00g. As no. (55) except for the date

59\*, Lu.Mo.654 - Li'/a' + al-Nasir Yiisuf + al-Musta'sim 29mm, 10.46g. As no. (56) except for the date

60\*. Lu.Mo.655 - Li'lii' + al-Ndasir Yiisuf + al-Musta'sim 26mm, 3.19g. As no. (56) except for the date

61. Lu.Mo.656A - Lii'lii' + al-Nasir Yiisuf  + al-Musta'sim

27mm, 5.31g, Hennequin CCCVIIB. As no. (56) except for the date

When a Mongol attack on Baghdad became imminent, Li'li'

preferred to remain neutral. However, Hulagti would not accept

that and asked Lili' to supply him with weapons. This probably

gave Lili' some access to Hiilagii's camps, enabling him to pass

4 The reference there is coin no. 7741/1. Perhaps a researcher could verify the reading there.

5 It is reported that Hiilagii's astrologers had warned him against fighting the Abbasid caliph.
some useful information and warnings to the Abbasids who, at the

same time, asked Lili' to send them some entertainers from Mosul.

As is known, the Abbasid caliph, contrary to good advice from his chief wazir, decided to adopt his military generals' views

and challenge the Mongols on the battlefield. The Abbasid armies were defeated and Baghdad was besieged, ending disastrously for

the Abbasids. When Baghdad fell to the Mongols in 14 Rajab 656, the caliph al-Musta'sim was murdered® and the Abbasid dynasty there was brought to an end.

During that battle, Lili' dispatched a force from Mosul led by his son, Isma'il, who, it seems, marched rather slowly, reaching Baghdad after the fight was concluded. This led to Hulagu's accusation of Lili' that he had deliberately ordered a slow march in order to join the winning side. Frightened, Li' lt'

hurriedly went to Hilagii in Hamadan at the end of Rajab 656h, carrying large amounts of valuable presents as well as his kafan?

indicating that he was totally at Htilagii's mercy.

## ١ 656h-B

62\*. Lu.Mo.656B - Li'l' + Minkii, 27mm, 6.08g

# لولو ولكنثمق

# قاان اعظم

لا اله الا اله 3 قداوقك alle‏ ع وحده لا شريك له 3

# بادشاه روي - مخمة وموك )‏a

# وسلم

63\*, Lu.Mo.657A® - Lili' + Minkii, 23mm, 5.37g.

# يسلكتمق لولو

# قاان اعظم 4 لا اله الا الله.دلوفدخ ale‏ وحده لاشريك له 33 بادشاه روي 3 محمد رسول الله 3

# ذهين 3443 ‏caid 0 صلى الله عليه واله وسلم

# بسم الله ضرب هذا الدينا

ابملاركر صوملابل ورحملاةس سنة سبع و يسمخن ئامتسوة

© The caliph as well as most of his family and high ranking officials were killed. Hilagt sent Li'li' the heads of a high ranking caliphal advisor,

who was married to Li'lii's daughter, and some of his friends to be hanged in Mosul. This terrified Li'li and he had no recourse but to oblige Hulagi. ' Kafan is the cloth or shroud that the dead body is wrapped with before burial.

Hiulagii treated Li'li' well as an honoured guest, approving his

sovereignty over Mosul and Lili' returned home in Sha'ban 657. By this time, Li'li' was an old man in his mid-seventies and was

alarmed and frightened at the size and strength of the Mongol armies. He died® shortly after and was succeeded in Mosul by his son, Isma'Tl.

# (657h)-B 0

64\*. Lu.Mo(657)B - Li'la' + Minkii, 23mm, 5.10g.

# لولو قر,4 si ٍ‏ اع لا اله الا الله وحده

# E‏ قاان اعظم A,‏ هللا لوسر دمحم هل كيرشالا +3

# 3 خداوند عالم 3 صلى الله عليه واله و سلم ‏A

# 233 يوردهاشداب

'sj‏ نيدلا ردب ميحرلا كلملا 8 تديز نيمز تمظعه 3 ئاضفلال

# بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ضرب هذا انيدلار رابملاك صوملابل

Al-Malik al-Saleh Isma'il\_.ط‎ Badr al-Din Li'li' (657 660h)

# 657h-C

65\*, Lu.Mo.657C - sma 'il + Minkii, 25mm, 6.29g

# اسمعيل‎

# لا اله الا الله مهنكلو

# قاان اعظم a a خداوند i alle‏ وحده لا شريك له 3

# "A \> با‎ بادشاه روي ع محمد ‏swod الله بد

# = صلى الله عليه plug

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة سبع و يسمخن ئامتسوة

It is to be noted that on Li'li''s dinars 62, 63 and 64, the words

"و اله"‎ appear on the obverse. This refers to the family or kinship of the Prophet Muhammad and usually indicates that the dynasty,

or the ruler at least, is of the Shiite Muslim sect. It had been

reported that Li'lt'" was such, or at least had such inclinations, however, he had not publicised this during the Abbasid era out of

respect to the Abbasid caliph, who was of the Sunni sect.

5 The chronicles give differing dates for Li'li's death: it ranges from Sha'ban 656h, which is unlikely as dinars of Li'li' dated 657h exist, to Sha'ban 657h.
66. Lu.Mo.658A - Isma@'il  + Minkii, 27mm, 8.55g. Lane Poole 1701.126.

# يعامسال

# لااله الا الله بج

# ' وحده لاشريك له 53 \|

# منكلوق

# قاان اعظم خداوند عالم

# ا كا ماك

# محمد رسول الله

# صلى الله عليه وسلم

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة ثمان و يسمخن ئامتسوة

# بادشاه روي

# محمد رسول الله

# رمين زيدت تمظعه

67\*. Lu.Mo.658B - /sma@'il + Minkii, 23mm, 3.84g.

# ككنمو يعامسال

# قاان اعظم لا اله الا الله

# «as‏ م شريك له 53 خداوند alle‏ غ Le siing‏ $$ = $$

# زمين زيدت عظمة صلى الله عليه والدين

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة ثمان و يسمخن ئامتسوة

Initially, Isma'tl continued to strike dinars similar in format to

those struck in his father's time, paying allegiance to the Mongols. However, he was seeking opportunities to rid himself of their

control. Isma'il went to Syria in Safar 659 to visit his brother

Ishaq, who ruled Jejirat b. Omar then, presumably seeking

alliances against the Monguls who had sustained losses in Syria. The following dinar no.68 must be the last that was struck by Isma'il, in which he pays allegiance to the Mongols.

68. Lu.Mo.659A - Isma@'il\_ + Minkii, 25mm, 6.14g

Seen by the author with a Middle Eastern dealer. Same as no.(67) plus "ass" at the end of the 5" line.

Isma'il and his brothers arrived in Cairo at around the same time

as a descendant of the Abbasid caliphs, Ahmed b. al-Zahir, arrived in Egypt, which was then under Mamluk control. He was

proclaimed caliph there in Rajab 659. By this time the power of

the Mongols had dwindled as Hilagii reduced his forces in Syria

and Iraq in anticipation of internal family feuding. This, together with Mamluk successes in driving the Mongols out of Syria,

encouraged Isma'il to issue dinars citing the new Abbasid caliph

who has become to be known as al-Mustansir bi-Allah, an example of which is the dinar no.69. 69. Lu.Mo.659A - Ismd 'il + al-Mustansir 25mm,?g. Sotheby auction 28 April 82, Lot 130

# \| الامام محمد رسول الله 8

# 3 وحده لاشريك له لملاك الصالح نتسملارص للابه

# ركن الدنيا امير نمؤملاني والدين

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار ruJ ‏sllag سنة تسع وخمسين ئامتسوة

70. Lu.Mo.659B - 151217 + Baybars + al-Mustansir

28mm, 5.48g, Sotheby auction 20 Oct 86, Lot 903

# لااله الا الله

# ‏cC هدحو نتسملارص هل كيرشال للابه

## لملاك الذ ربيبس

# ركن الدنيا امير نمؤملاني والدين

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة تسع وخمسين ئامتسوة

71. Lu.Mo.660 - Isma@'il + Baybars + al-Mustansir

25mm, 3.73g, Sotheby auction 20 Oct 86, Lot 904

# يعامسال الامام

# \* للااله الا الله وحده °3 3 لاشريك له نتسملارص

# لملاك الصالح عا بلله امير نمؤملاني

# 2 اطلسلان الاعظم لملاك

# ركن الدنيا. ونيم الظاهر ربيبس

# بسم الله ضرب هذا انيدلار صوملابل سنة ستين ئامتسوة

By now, Baybars had taken complete control of the Mamluks,

forcing the new caliph to pronounce him Sultan, as well as a caliphal partner, in Ramadan 659. Baybars had, presumably,

encouraged Isma'il to denounce his Mongol allegiances, promising him aid in liberating Mosul from the Mongols. Thus,

the dinars nos.69, 70 and 71, issued in 659 and 660 were struck citing the Abbasid caliph in Egypt as well as al-Malik al-Zahir Baybars. Initially, Isma'tl became part of a force that was formed

to liberate Baghdad. This army had some successes against the

Mongols in Syria, then Isma'il decided to go to Mosul and

entered it in Dhu'l Hijja 659. Shortly thereafter, a significant Mongol force came to Mosul and laid siege in Muharram 660.

The anticipated help from the Mamluks never came and, after

a seven months siege of the city and many negotiations, Isma'l

surrendered in 15 Sha'ban 660, after promises of good treatment, however, he was captured and executed by Hilagii, thereby ending Li'li'id rule in Mosul.

In conclusion, the dinars of Li'li' suggest that he played a very significant and effective diplomatic game in order to

maintain the security of Mosul, especially during his official rule of the city. His wise choice of differing alliances with the various

powers at the time succeeded not only in thwarting the greed of

his immediate neighbours but also increased the territory of

Mosul. Moreover, he was a contemporary of four Abbasid caliphs, with all of whom he maintained a very good relationship. In his

time, art and craftsmanship flourished in Mosul. He was described

by contemporary historians as being a very wise and just ruler. His