The name of caliph al-Qadir on this coin is accompanied by

## the title-like expression UL ولى عهده الغالب‎ "Heir of His throne,

overcoming thanks to Allah" as on the contemporary coins of the

Buwayhids, cf. coin of Abi'l-Fawaris Qiwam al-Dawla struck in Shiraz in the near AH 404408 years.'

The end of the reign of Abi' \|-"Abbas Ma' miin II b. Ma' min I,

the decline of the Ma'munids and the capture of Khwarizm by

sultan Mahmiid Ghaznavi are described in detail in the Ta'rikh-i Mas'iid (see part "Reminder about Khwarizm") of Abi'l-Fadl Beyhagi. Notes

'Bosworth ©. E., The New Islamic Dynasties, Edinburgh, 1996, p. 178.

2 Kalinin V. A., Kleschinov V. A., "Monety khorezmshakha Altuntasha", XII All-Russian Numismatic Conference, Moscow 19-24th of Arpil, 2004,

Abstracts of Papers and Communications, Moscow, 2004, pp. 67-68.

3 Numismatic on-line database ZENO (<http://zeno.ru),> nos. 4808, 52027.

\* Markov. A. K., "O klade kuficheskikh monet, naydennykh v sele

Krescheny Baran, Spasskogo uezda Kazanskoy gubernii," Tipografija Imperatorskoy Akademii Nauk, St.Petersburg, 1908, pp. 4-10. \* ZENO no. 64939.

©" Abii' l-Fadl Bayhagi. Tashkent, 1969, pp. 809.

7 Treadwell L., Buyid coinage. A Die Corpus (322-445), Oxford, 2001, coins nos. Sh404-407b.

\* Aba' l-Fadl Bayhagi. Ta'rikh-i Mas'iid, ibid, pp. 808-836. Ta'rikh-i Mas'iid, transl. by Arends A. K.,

# THE DIKHASHKHO HOARD OF

GEORGIAN-HULAGID CHRISTIAN DIRHAMS: PRELIMINARY RESULTS

By Irakli Paghava, Roland Spanderashvili & Shalva Parkosadze

Objectives & Methods Our goal is to analyse a hoard of Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams! excavated in the village of Dikhashkho, in the Imereti province of Georgia.

We attempted to analyse this hoard in relation to the

economic, monetary, and political history of Georgia, South Caucasus, the Mongol Empire and the Ilkhan State in general. Within the framework of the set objectives we attributed the coins

to rulers, identified types, read dates, and studied their weight

standard and die axis; a die analysis was also undertaken and the historical background explored.

General hoard data The only information on provenance is the finders' report, and

could not be verified in any other way. However, there seems to be no reason to doubt the finders account.

The hoard was discovered in the village of Dikhashkho, in Vani district, in Imereti (a historical province in Western Georgia) (cf. Map 1), in the early 2000s. During agricultural work (tillage?) on one of the plots of the land next to the village (the

precise location was not specified) the hand-held farm implement

ran into the top of a kvevri, the traditional Georgian ceramic vessel

for storing wine, which used to be stored in the ground. The

finders started to dig it out, and discovered 6 more ceramic vessels of a smaller size (described as "pots") which had been buried

around the kvevri. One of those 6 vessels contained several

handfuls of silver coins of similar appearance, allegedly, more than one hundred.

The type of container is peculiar, but not unparalleled. For instance, a Georgian imitation of an asper of the Empire of Trebizond (13'°-14" century) was discovered at Sairme (also in Imereti) in a similar kvevri?. The selection of such a container

points in our opinion to the owner of the kvevri and most probably of the area proper as the person who possessed this money: one would not have concealed one's treasure in someone else's household vessel.

# geet ag

Map 1. 'Modem map of Georgia. Dikhashkho aad find Toe ation.

Unfortunately, the finders dispersed the hoard, selling it piecemeal. The authors managed to get access to a private collection of Mongol coins\* comprising a major part of the Dikhashkho hoard, namely, 51 coins. They were all so-called

Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams minted in eastern Georgia (Tiflis mint)\* in the name of several IIkhans: Arghun (25 coins, 49.02% of the total number), Arghun and his heir Qazan (2, 3.92%), Gaykhatu (21, 41.18%) and Baydu (3, 5.88%). The

detailed information on these 51 coins, including the dates, metrology etc. is presented in Table \[. The types are well known?

and it seems un-necessary to repeat their detailed description.

The earliest coins from this hoard are Ar17 and Ar25 as far as

we can judge by the remaining dates in the external segments. The

date 5 is clearly visible on the former coin in the top segment,

whereas what remains in the left segment of Ar25 may be either 1

or 5, but as Arghun ascended the throne in AH 683 and died in 690, the coin should bear 685 as well. Of course, we cannot exclude the possibility that some coins of Arghun, bore earlier

dates on effaced or off-flan segments. The latest coins ought to be

the 3 dirhams of Baydu (B1-3), who ascended the throne in AH

694 and ruled for several months; all the dirhams in his name bear the date AH 694°. Thus, the time span for the coins represented in

the Dikhashkho hoard is AH 685-694 or AH 683-694 at the very

outside. It is also quite remarkable that the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams of Abagha were not represented in the Dikhashkho hoard at all, despite being quite common. No Tiflis dirhams of Davit VIII dated AH 695 and 696' were represented in

it either, and it indicates that the Dikhashkho hoard was probably buried in the late AH 690s, maybe in AH 694 or 695.

Historical background We will review the contemporary political situation in the Georgian Kingdom (cf. Map 2) in order to put the Dikhashkho

hoard in its proper historical context and extract the maximum possible information from it.

The first Mongol intrusion into the territory of the Georgian Kingdom dates back to 12207. However, the conquest proper started later, in 1235-1236' and resulted in the more or less effective and prolonged subjugation of the Georgian state'". However, western Georgia as well as parts of the south-western

Georgia escaped the Mongol yoke, and secured a more or less

permanent independence under the leadership of King Davit VI Narin, son of Queen Rusudani, after his revolt in 12591".

On the other hand, this meant the effective partitioning of the

state. Davit VI Narin ruled independently in western Georgia, i.e.

in Imereti (literally, the \[place\] beyond, referring to the Likhi
gorge, dividing Georgia into two major parts) till 1293, whereas his cousin Davit VII Ulu ruled in Amereti, \[the place\] on this side'\*, corresponding to eastern Georgia and parts of south-

western Georgia, till his death in 1270, when he was succeeded by his son - Demetre 11 (1270-1289)'\*. Moreover, Sargis I, the representative of the noble family of Jageli, managed to place his lands (actually, the major part of south-western Georgia) under

the direct authority of the Ilkhan in 1266, thus evading the suzerainty of the Georgian king". Sargis I ruled till 1285, when he was succeeded by Beka I (1285-1306)!°. Jujids 2 oe

$$ = $$ Kingdom of Amereti Caspian -" oa" (vassal of IIkhans) Sea 'ingdom o\} \_ Imereti ay NY ب‎

> Racha - - Black Sea حجن‎ /  TR و‎ Arsveti/ ' \*\\ Pas The / رك ريسم‎ 2 0-3 سي ا ا‎ Empire of Trebizond loa: (vassal of likhans) / - بيه‎  S A د‎

(vassal of را‎ ST \\ 5.  $$ "= $$ $$ _-= $$ Wkbans) ae

\\ ) Ilkhans "i, \\ ا‎ hed Map 2. Map of the Georgian kingdoms and principalities in the last quarter of the 13" century. (Finds of Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams are indicated by the oblique slash signs. The Dikhashkho hoard find location is indicated by the inverted triangle.)

Since the Dikhashkho hoard was discovered in the territory of the Kingdom of Imereti, the political relationship between this entity

and the Ilkhans acquires particular importance. The realm of Davit

Narin managed to remain independent despite the direct invasion by the Mongol forces. \[/khan attempts to utilise internal discord by supporting the anti-royalist policy of the eristavi (duke) of Racha failed'®. Davit Narin, in his turn, maintained contact with the Mamluks, the arch-rivals of the Ilkhans!'. Later on, Davit Narin and the Ilkhans managed to come to a remarkable

compromise. When Demetre II was executed by the IIkhans in

1289, the latter did not assent to allowing Demetre's son (the

future king of Amereti, Davit VIII the Recalcitrant) to ascend the throne; instead, Davit Narin was offered and accepted the offer to

send his son, Vakhtang, to reign in Amereti. After the death of Davit Narin, Vakthang would have succeeded him, uniting at least

the Kingdoms of Amereti and Imereti. On the other hand, this trade-off naturally secured the loyalty and even perhaps the submission of the Kingdom of Imereti to the Ikhans!\*. But

Vakthang II ruled in the Kingdom of Amereti only for a relatively short time and died in 1292.

Davit VI Narin died in 1293, and was succeeded by his son, Konstantine I (1293-1327). However, Mikeli, another son of Davit, immediately usurped power in Argveti and Racha', the

eastern provinces of his father's kingdom, neighbouring eastern Georgia with its centre, Tiflis, still under the Mongol yoke. Thus,

the west-Georgian state became further divided and it was not

reunited until the death of Konstantine in 1327, when Mikeli

seized all the lands. Mikeli ruled the reunited Kingdom of Imereti for only a short time, 1327-1329. After his death, Giorgi V the Brilliant (another son of Demetre II) annexed his dominion, reducing Bagrat I, son of Mikeli, to the rank of a vassal prince"'.

The information on Mikeli's domination over Argveti and Racha derives from the Georgian chronicler, who did not specify the precise border between the possessions of the two brothers".

It seems to be significant that Dikhashkho was seemingly located

in the borderland, and could have been disputed. As already

suggested above, the hoard was buried in about 1295, i.e. in the

early years of the confrontation between Konstantine and Mikeli,

perhaps as a result of the unstable situation in the region. Dikhashkho

This hoard was discovered in Dikhashkho or nearby, but the first mention of this village is only in the 18" بع‎ according to the

Georgian encyclopaedia entry. However, the source of this information is not provided'\*, and we were not able to establish it. The presence of utility vessels with 13" c. coins in them at this

location indicates the site was inhabited at the time. Dikhashkho

probably dates back prior to the advent of the Mongols. This toponym contains the root word dikha, meaning earth in the Megrelian language", but the territory where the modern

Dikhashkho is located is populated nowadays by the sub-group of

the Georgian people speaking Georgian; and they seemingly

populated this area mixing with and replacing the representatives of the sub-group of the Georgian people speaking Megrelian already in the 6""-8" c.\* The survival of the Megrelian toponym may indicate that the habitation there existed at least from the 6"7" c.. It has even been suggested that Dikhashkho with neighbouring Vani constituted the capital of the ancient Colchis".

Circulation area analysis To our knowledge, so far, all the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams finds in South Caucasus" have been located in the

territory subject to Ilkhan suzerainity (both within and outside the Georgian kingdoms) (cf. Map 2225. As to the Kingdom of Amereti, independent from Mongols during the major part of its existence in the 13" c., the hostilities between the west-Georgian

state and the Ilkhans dominating the principality of Samtkhse and

the east-Georgian kingdom of Amereti probably hindered the

trade between these lands and hence the penetration of the Tiflis

(as well as the other Mongol) coins into western Georgia.

The Dikhashkho hoard is the first find of Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams in the Kingdom of Imereti (western Georgia). This broadens our outlook with regard to the circulation area of

this group of Georgian-Mongol coins and possibly sheds some

light on the economic/monetary life of the kingdom of Imereti. The reasons for their importation could be non-economic, particularly taking into account the narrow chronological span of

the represented coins. This hoard points to some sort of connection (of an unclear nature) between the former dominion of Davit Narin (already effectively divided into two parts by his

sons) and the southern or eastern neighbours - the principality of

Samtskhe, or the kingdom of Amereti, or the Ilkhans in general. However, in our opinion, the selection of the container for the coins indicates a local peasant or at least a local resident as the

person who buried this hoard. No valid conclusions could be

drawn based on a single find, but we consider it to be quite probable for the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams (Tiflis Mongol silver coin in general?) to have played some part (though

apparently a somewhat limited one) in the economic life of the Kingdom of Imereti.

Weight analysis The Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams pertain to the Early Iikhan Period of Great Mongol/Ilkhan coinage" or, in other

terms, to the first, local coinage period of Ilkhan numismatic history\*'. That was the time when "individual mints or groups of

nearby mints each maintained a distinctive coinage, principally in silver, occasionally adhering to local standards of weight & fineness"\*!. The dirham, the principal denomination in silver, was

mostly issued to a standard of approximately 2.88 g before AH

678, and that of 2.52 g later (till the reform of Ghazan in AH 697)\*\*. However, "several regions maintained local standards'\*\*.

It is not clear what the weight standard of the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams was. Pakhomov noted that the weight of the well-preserved specimens was in the range 2.20-2.50 g, the

average being "2.30-2.85 g" (2.85 must be a typo, the 8 probably standing for 3). Jalaghania considered the weight of the coins in

the name of different Ilkhans fluctuated: according to her calculations, the mean weight of the dirhams in the name of
Abagha was 2.17 g (calculated from 56 specimens), the mean weight of the dirhams in the name of Arghun was 2.30 g (94 specimens), and the mean weight of the dirhams in the name of Gaykhatu was 2.24 g (15 specimens), whereas the sole unholed specimen in the name of Baydu weighed 2.18 2. The coins from

the Dikhashkho hoard present different weights (see Table 2). Our

data suggest that the weight standard did not change, the mean weight in the name of Arghun, Gaykhatu, and Baydu being 2.40, 2.40 and 2.42 g. and the maxima being 2.61, 2.51 and 2.45 g. In

our opinion, at least the late post-Abagha and post-Ahmad Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams were possibly issued to the 2.52 g standard as well.

Die analysis We carried out the die analysis of all the coins pertaining to this hoard\*. The results are illustrated in the Die linkage charts 1-4 (Table 3).

Out of the 25 available obverses in the name of Arghun (only), 20 (80%) had Arghun's name in a correct form, genitive -

"Arghunu", while another 5 (20%) had it in the incorrect form - "Arghunun"". The 20 obverses with "Arghunu" were minted with

16 different dies sometimes bearing one of the 3 varying symbols

on top of the last letter of "Arghunu": a cross, a star, a drop. The 5

obverses with "Arghunun" were minted with 5 different dies with

1 coin having a star on top of the last letter of Arghunun - Arl9 (Fig. 19). In total, 21 different obverse dies were employed for minting the obverses of 25 coins.

The 25 reverses of the coins bearing the name of Arghun (only) on the obverse were minted with 23 different reverse dies. All 23 had the cross in the common position, i.e. in the bottom line. While classifying these 23 reverse dies we distinguished the

following 4 symbols visible interchangeably to the left of the

cross: a star and three different vignettes. Two coins bearing the

names of Arghun and his heir, Ghazan, on the obverse were struck with 2 different obverse dies and 2 different reverse dies. A sprig

symbol is present in the bottom line on one of the specimens.

The 21 coins bearing the name of Gaykhatu on the obverse

were struck with 14 different obverse dies: the area on top of the

last letter of the Ilkhan's name (Arghunu, on these coins of

Gaykhatu) in Mongol sometimes has a symbol, viz. a star or 3 dots.

The reverses of 21 coins bearing the name of Gaykhatu on the

obverse were struck with 20 different dies: 3 dies (15%) of which had the cross in the 2TM line and 18 (85%) had the cross in the bottom line. All 3 coins with the cross in the 2" line were struck

with 3 different reverse (as well as obverse) dies. The 18 coins of

Gaykhatu with the cross in the bottom line were struck with 17 different reverse dies. The following symbols were visible interchangeably to the left of the cross when the cross was in the

bottom line: a star (also present on many coins in the name of

Arghun); 3 dots; a vignette. 3 coins in the name of Baydu were

struck with 2 different obverse dies and 3 different reverse dies. In

this sample, no die links connect the groups of dirhams with the obverses in the name of different I/khans.

The die analysis results (cf. Table 3) suggest that the coin

sides which we consider to be the obverses because they bear the Ilkhan's name were spared more than the sides with the Christian prayer, as the former are not as numerous as the latter (cf. the Obverse-reverse dies ratio column of Table 3); it is considered

that the anvil dies (considered to be the obverse dies from the technical point of view) suffered less from striking the blanks of

metal compared to the hammer (upper) dies. Therefore, it appears likely, in the case of the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams, that

the dies with the IIkhan's name engraved were deliberately spared by using them as the anvil dies, perhaps because they were

considered to be more significant. On the other hand, the

production of the dies with the other side (with the Christian

prayer and the date formula in the segments) was undoubtedly

much more labour-intensive because of the need to engrave many

more symbols than on the dies intended for the opposite side.

Therefore, it would have been logical to expect these dies to be spared more.

Our sample (the Dikhashkho hoard) presents a greater number of different dies for the coins minted in the name of the late Ilkhans (Gaykhatu, Baydu), as opposed to Arghun's dirhams. The

trend, however,is not as clear as in the previous case (cf. the number of coins minted per obverse die & number of coins minted per reverse die columns of Table 3). That may point to the

reduction in the mint output per annum (fixed period of time) in

the reign of Gaykhatu and Baydu (the difference in the total mint

output would have been understandable - Gaykhatu ruled in AH 690-694, Baydu ruled for several months only in AH 694, whereas Arghun ruled in AH 683-690, for a longer period than his two successors taken together).

However, no statistical analysis was performed at this stage of

our research and the reasoning in the previous two paragraphs is of a preliminary nature only. The trends certainly need to be verified and may be even disproved.

Die axis analysis To our knowledge, mint procedure for the Georgian-Hulagid

Christian dirhams has not been analysed before. At this time, we

decided to concentrate on information derived from the die axis. Making an assumption that the minting technique at Tiflis did not change in the AH 680s and 690s, we plotted the die axis indices of

all 51 coins from the Dikhashkho hoard on the radar diagram (Radar chart 1). The radar chart shows sixteen possible die axis positions and the number of coins which exhibited that axis. 14 coins out of 51 (27.45%) have a die axis within the 11:00-1:00

range, with 11 having a a die axis within the 11:45-12:15 range (21.57% of the total), whereas 17 dirhams (33.33%) have a die axis within the 5:00-7:00 range, with only 6 (11.76% of the total) having a a die axis within the 5:45-6:15 range. Another 20 coins of this hoard (39.22%) have the die axis at the intermediate positions.

Two groups of coins in this sample were minted with the same pair of dies: Ar2,5-6 (Figs. 2, 5-6) and Gcl,6 (Figs. 31, 36). They

had the following die axis indices: Ar2,5-6 - 12:15, 6:15, 5:30; Gcl,6 - 4:45, 1:30.

In our opinion, our data suggest that some effort was

deliberately made to preserve the regular alignment of the dies (either 12 or 6 o'clock, with no preference for either one), but that the dies employed were not connected. 11:45-12:15 11.00-11:30 12:30-1.00 10°15-10.45 1:15-1:45 9°30-10:00 2:00-2:30 \| 2:45-3:15 + لتب + 8.45-9:15 8:00-8:30 3:30-4:00 7:15-7:45 415-645 6:30-7:00 5:00-5°30 5:45-6:15

## Radar chart 1. Die axis indices of the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams from the Dikhashkho hoard.

Conclusions The Dikhashkho hoard, possibly containing around 100 coins, of which 51 Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams were available for

the study, was probably buried in the second half of the 1290s in

the territory of the kingdom of Imereti. It sheds some light on the economic history of this Georgian state in this epoch of Mongol dominance in Georgia and the rivalry between King Konstantine
and the usurper, Mikeli, in the west-Georgian kingdom. The discovery of these 13" c. coins in household vessels points to the medieval habitation of Dikhashkho. The hoard coins make us incline to the idea that at least the late post-Abagha and \_ postAhmad Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams were issued to the 2.52 g standard. The die analysis performed by the authors suggests that a fuller die analysis of Georgian coins of the late 13" century would yield valuable results and that the study of the die axis is important in understanding the procedure of the contemporary Tiflis mint.

Acknowledgments We would like to express our gratitude to Mr S. Turkia for his habitual support of our numismatic research. Notes

1 For the arguments on the term cf. Paghava 2008:7-8, footnote 1. 2 Pakhomoy 1949:#1174.

3 We would like to express our gratitude to its owner.

4 Pakhomov 1970:160-168; Lang 1955:44-49; Jalaghania 1958:53-65; Paghava 2008.

5 For the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams of Arghun see Pakhomov

1970:165-166; Lang 1955:46-48; Jalaghania 1958:60-61; -Diler 2006:320, #Ar-223; Paghava 2008; for Arghun & Qazan Pakhomoy

1970:166; Jalaghania 1958:60:; for Gaykhatu Pakhomov 1970:166-167; Lang 1955:48-49; Jalaghania 1958:61; Diler 2006:333, #Gy-247; for Baydu Pakhomov 1970:167-168; Jalaghania 1958:62-63; Diler 2006:341,

#Ba-254.

6 1. Jalaghania mentions the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirham (in the

name of Baydu?) dated 695, Dhu al-Qi'dah (Jalaghania 1958:68), but no source is indicated (cf. Jalaghania 1958:102).

7 Pakhomov 1970:171-172; Jalaghania 1958:70-71; Diler 2006:353,

#Ga-276. 8 Javakhishvili III:4. 9 Ibid.:17-23. 10 Ibid.:24, 43-46. 11 Ibid.:69, 87-95.

12 These linguistic nuances show very well which part of the country was considered by the contemporaries to be the core area. 13 Ibid.:74-75. 14 Ibid.:83-85.

15 Meanwhile, Lazs, the Georgian people constituted a bulk of the

population of the Empire of Trebizond. /bid.: 140-147. 16 Ibid.:87-91; Sikharulidze 1967. 17 Amitai-Preis 2004:150. 18 Javakhishvili IIT: 120-122. 19 Ibid.:124. 20 Ibid.:171.

21 Annalist-Kiknadze 1987:187-188. 22 Dikhashkho 1978.

23 Kakabadze 1959. The ending of this toponym (shkho) may be of Megrelian origin as well (cf. /bid.). Megrelian is a language of the Kartvelian (Georgian) group, spoken by the residents of the province of Megrelia in western Georgia. All the residents of Megrelia speak either Georgian (another language of the Kartvelian group, closely related to Megrelian, spoken in eastern and south-western Georgia, as well as in

some areas of western Georgia) or are bilingual in Megrelian and Georgian, the latter having always been used in education, church, office work and literature as the sole written and official language. 24 Javakhishvili 11:88-89. 25 Kakabadze 1959.

26 We are unaware of their finds in other areas, which are probable for the

least, as one would think that these silver coins were used in the long-

distance trade across the Mongol empire. Pakhomov 1926:##147-148; Pakhomov Pakhomov 1940:44853-856; Pakhomov Jalaghania 1979; 123-130. 28 One should take into account that, during the 19" and the 20" centuries,

the South Caucasus was divided between the Ottoman Empire (later the

Republic of Turkey) and the Russian Empire (later the USSR). The

hoard/coin find reporting system was, in our opinion, much more efficient

in the latter; hence the possible bias with regard to the distribution of the finds of some particular types of coins. 29 Album 2001 عد‎ 30 Album 1998:103-104. 31 Ibid.:104. 32 Ibid.:104; Album 2001:x, footnote 19. 33 Album 1998:104.

34 Precisely what Pakhomov meant expressing an average as a range is unclear. Pakhomov 1970:168.

1938:##445, 447, 450; 1949:1151-1152, 1155, 1158;

35 Jalaghania 1958:59-63, 102. 36 As far as we know, this is the first application of die analysis to the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams, at least using a decent sample. 37 Lang 1955:47-48; Paghava 2008:13.

38 Unfortunately, to our knowledge no dies used for minting Georgian coins have survived. References

1.  Album 1998 - Album 5. A Checklist of Islamic Coins. 1998.

2.  Album 2001 - Album 5. Sylloge of Islamic Coins in the Ashmolean

Volume 9 Iran after the Mongol Invasion. Ashmolean Museum Oxford, 2001.

3.  Allen 1932 - Allen W. A History of the Georgian People. London, 1932.

4.  Amitai-Preis 2004 - Amitai-Preiss R. Mongols and Mamluks, the Mamluk-Ilkhanid War, 1260-1281. 1995. Cambridge University Press, 2004.

5.  Annalist-Kiknadze 1987 - \[Annalist. The Centennial Chronicle. (The text prepared for publication, researched, notes and vocabulary

appended by Kiknadze R.). Tbilisi, 1987.\] (Original text in Georgian: JamTaaRmwereli. aswlovani matiane. (teqsti gamosacemad

moamzada, gamokvleva, SeniSvnebi da \_ leqsikoni daurTo r. kiknaZem). Tbilisi, 1987.)

6.  Dikhashkho 1978 - \["Dikhashkho". Georgian Soviet Encyclopedia, Volume 3. Tbilisi, 1978.\] (Original text in Georgian: "dixaSxo". garTuli sabWoTa enciklopedia, tomi 3. Tbilisi, 1978.) 7.  Diler 2006 - Diler O. Ilkhans. Coinage of the Persian Mongols. Istanbul, 2006.

8.  Kakabadze 1959 - (\[Kakabadze S. "The ancient Georgian city". Soviet Art, #5. 1959. Pp. 65-66.\] (Original text in Georgian: kakabaZe s. "uZvelesi qarTuli qalaqi". sabWoTa xelovneba, #5. 1959. gv. 65-66.)

9.  Lang 1955 - Lang D. Studies in the Numismatic History of Georgia in Transcaucasia. New-Y ork, 1955.. Jalaghania 1979 - \[Jalaghania I. Foreign coins in the monetary

circulation of the 5-13" C. Georgia. Tbilisi, 1979.\] (Original text in Russian: Jbkanaranna VU. Wnozeunax monema OeHedxCHOM obpaiwyenuu Tpysuu V-XIII ee. Tounucn, 1979).

11. Jalaghania 1958 - \[Jalaghania I. From the Monetary History of

Georgia of the 13th ©. Tbilisi, 1958.\] (Original text in Russian: Jixanaranua VJI. 113 ucmopuu monemnoeo 0270 6 \[pysuu XIII 6exa. TOumncn, 1958).. Javakhishyili 1ل‎ - (Javakhishvili Iv. "The History of the Georgian

Nation, Volume II". The Works in Twelve Volumes, Volume IL. Tbilisi, 1983.\] (Original text in Georgian: javaxiSvili iv. "qarTveli eris istoriis II wigni". Txzulebani Tormet tomad, tomi II. Tbilisi, 1983).. Javakhishyili 11ل‎ - (Javakhishvili Iv. "The History of the Georgian

Nation, Volume 111". The Works in Twelve Volumes, Volume Ul. Tbilisi, 1982.\] (Original text in Georgian: javaxiSvili iv. "qarTveli eris istoriis 111 wigni". 7xzulebani Tormet tomad, tomi Ill. Tbilisi, 1982).. Paghava 2008 - Paghava I., Gvindjilia Z., Kudin 5. "Star in Lieu of

Cross: Notes on the Early Georgian-Khulagid Christian Dirhams". Journal of Oriental Numismatic Society, #196, Summer 2008. Pp. 715.. Pakhomoy 1926 - \[Pakhomov Ye. "The Coin Hoards of Azerbaijan

and South Caucasus". Works of the Society for the Exploration and Study of Azerbaijan, issue 3. Baku, 1926.\] (Original text in Russian: Ilaxomop E. "Mounerupie kulatb 331881604352".

Tpyabr 0611162182 oOcrteqoBaHHA Hu 13962218 4367631138112, Bbimyck 3. baxy, 1926.). Pakhomov 1938 - \[Pakhomov Ye. The Hoards of Azerbaijan and

other Republics, Regions and Areas of the Caucasus. Issue III. Baku,

1938.\] (Original text in Russian: 113201108 E. 101040١١640

u Opyeux pecny6.!uK u 1/706 Kaexas3a. Boinyck II. baxy, 1938.) Pakhomoy 1940 - \[Pakhomov Ye. Coins Hoards of Azerbaijan and other Republics, Regions and Areas of the Caucasus. Issue III. Baku,

1940.) (Original text in Russian: Taxomop 1. Monemunoie K1advl

Aszepbaudscana u dpyeux pecnybsuk, Kpaee u odnacmet Kaexa3a. Boinyck III. baxy, 1940.). Pakhomoy 1949 - \[Pakhomov Ye. Azerbaijan and other Republics,

Regions and Areas of the Caucasus. Issue IV. Baku, 1949.\] (Original

text in Russian: \[laxomos E. 1107611516 1001 136700411020114 u

Opyeux pecnyoiuk, 107026 u 001411111 Kaexasa. Boinyck IV. Baxy, 1949.). Pakhomov 1970 - \[Pakhomov E. The Coins of Georgia. Tbilisi, 1970.\]

(Original text in Russian: laxomos E.A. Monemoi Ipv3uu. Tounucn, 1970).. Sikharulidze 1967 - \[Sikharulidze I. The Struggle of the Georgian

Nation for Independence in the 13-14" C. Tbilisi, 1967.\] (Original

text in Georgian: sixaruliZe 1.  xalxis brZola damoukideblobisaTvis XIII-XIV\_ ss. Tbilisi: sabWoTa saqarTvelo, 1967). ge
# saan 021 ا 57 02,5,6

1 r2,5,6 r3 4ع‎ r7 r8 r9 14م‎ 16 \| 10 r13 15م‎ rf r17 12 \| 19م 21: \| 8م‎ r20 r25 \| 22ع‎ 4

# \> Reverses (n=23) eas? Res ee Ga

Die linkage chart 1. Die links between the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams in the name of Arghun.

# Gaykhatu Arghun & Qazan Obverses (n=14) waynnets Obverses (n=2) Have-cG reverses 01 02

2ه‎ 03 \| 01,6 07 \| 010 02,8,9,1103 04,17 05,18 012,14 013 015 6

## \| \\ ri 2

## \| Reverses (n=2) \| Die linkage chart 2. Die links between the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams in the name of Arghun and his heir, Ghazan (Qazan).

# \| \| Baydu

## \| Obverses (n=2)

01 02,3 r1 +2 \| جم تم 2 \| 11م وم قم 10م \| 7, 11,6 \| 3ء‎ r5\| 117 18م‎ 42 714 713 115 6 د \| © ايج 2د‎:

## cG Gc (cross in the bottom line) rt 22 3

## Reverses (n=3)

## Reverses (n=20)

Die linkage chart 3. Die links between the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams in the name of Gaykhatu. Die linkage chart 4. Die links between the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams in the name of Baydu.
Table 1. The Dikhashkho hoard dirhams: Designations, metrology & dates

ID # Ikhan Wet Size Right Raktoan Led Top segment Date (AH) Comment axis segment segment segment

Arl Arghun 2.39 22.2 5:00 \[600\] 80? 8? year effaced \[6\]88?

| Ar2 | 2 | Arghun | 2.46 | 20.1-20.3 | 12:15 | 600? |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| only year | Rabr' al-Akhir pe scales |  |  |  |  |  | Rabi' al-Akhir

Ar3 Arghun 2.52. 22.2-23 12:15 90? only year Safar? 690? Safar?

Art \| 4 \| Arghun \| 2.40 \| 20.2-20.3 \| 12:15 \| \[600\] 2? off-flan 692? Month? - حك‎ Die match

Ars \| 5 \| Arghun \| 2.47 \| 20.1-21.1 \| 6:15 \| 600 x off-flan 69x, month? 0 يك‎ ence 690, Rabi' al-Akhir Die match

Arte \| 6 \| Arghun \| 2.3 \| 19.8-20.1 \| 5:30 \| 600 x off-flan 69x, month? سنن‎ hence 690, Rabi' al-Akhir

Ar7 Arghun 2.41 \| 21.1-22.2 1:30 X off-flan 69x, month?

al-? Rabi alArg \| 8 \| Arghun \| 2.27 \| 22.6-23.2 \| 10:30 \| 600 90? only year eh a a Incrustation?

7 alAv \| و‎ \| Arghun \| 2.35 \| 20.6-21.2 \| 11:30 \| \{600\} \[80\] 8? year Rabi' al-Akhir po يدا‎

| مر | لكك‎ | Arghun | 238 | كلصفوز‎ |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 3530 | year? |  |  |  |
| Safar/7/9 | oft-flan |  |  |  |

| AM | 12 | Arghun | 261 | 209-212 | 6:00 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| effaced | x, year |  |  |  |  |

| AT | ذر‎ | Arghun | 244 | 202215 | 5:00 |
| ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 2.23 | 20.8-21.7 |  |  |  |  |
| 2.39 | 19.9-20.2 |  |  |  |  |
| 2.42 | 21.2-22.5 |  |  |  |  |
| 2.28 | 20.2-21.1 |  |  |  |  |
| 12:15 | effaced |  |  |  |  |

| Arl | ig | Arghun | 2.45 | 20.6216 | 8:30 | \* |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 6007, 80? | off-flan |  |  |  |  |  |

"e Arghun yee) 20.3-20.9 8:30 \[600\] 80? x off-flan \[6\]8x? Month?

| Arghun | 2.43 | 20.1-21 |
|:--- | ---: |:--- |
| 6:30 | 600 |  |

| A? | 22 | Arghun | 25 | 202-213 | 6:30 | 600 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| x, effaced | x, effaced | Mubemam | 6xx, Muharram |  |  |  |

sy Arghun 2.4 19.9-21.2 9:30 x, effaced \| x? x, off-flan off-flan (6\]xx, month? Arghun 2.39 21-21.3 2:30 off-flan x, off-flan 68x, month?

Arghun Ar2 Rabi'? al- 6x5/1, Rabi'? al- \| ascended to Arghun 2.27 19.5-20.3 4:45 off-flan 5/1? Akhir? Akhir? hethroHeTi

rs 26 يولس جع‎ 242 \| 18.1-195 \| 12:00 \| off-flan \| off-flan \| off-flan effaced \[6\]xx, month?

| 97 | Arshun& | 546 | 187-207 | 7:00 | \[600\] |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| off-flan | year |  |  |  |  |
| 01 | 28 | Gaykhatu |  |  |  |

| cG2 | 29 | Gaykhatu | 2.38 | 19.3-20.9 |
|:--- | ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 12:15 | 600 |  |  |  |

cG3 \| 30 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.44 19.4-19.9 12:15 \[90\] off-flan off-flan 6\[9\]x, month?

| Gel | 31 | Gaykhatu | 2.37 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Shawwal | \[600\] |  |  |

Gce2 \| 32 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.44 19.1-20.6 12:00 600? off-flan off-flan effaced \[69\]x, month?

| Ge3 | 33 | Gaykhatu | 2.2 | 19.7-203 | 6:15 | x |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| effaced | off-flan |  |  |  |  |  |

Ge4 \| 34 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.44 \| 19.1-19.7 1:00 off-flan off-flan year? 6\{9\]x, month?

| GeS | 35 | Gaykhatu | 2.45 | 20.1-20.6 |
|:--- |:--- | ---: |:--- |:--- |
| 36 | Gaykhatu | 2.37 | 19.6-20.4 |  |
| 1:30 | effaced |  |  |  |
| off-flan | off-flan |  |  |  | --- hence 693?, Shawwal

Gc7 \| 37 Gaykhatu \| 2.48 19.4-20.2 8:00 effaced x, off-flan effaced \[69\]x, month?

| Rabr/Jumada | \[69x |  |  |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Ge8 | 38 | Gaykhatu | 2.36 | 20.1-208 |
| 1:30 | off-flan | off-flan | off-flan |  |
| RabtJumada? | Incrustation?ند‎ |  |  |  |

Dhu al- \[69\]4? Dhu al' Gc9 \| 39 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.37 \| 215-218 \| 6:15 \| \[600\] \[90\] 4? ome ras

"s 40 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.51 19,3-20.8 10:15 x off-flan effaced \[69\]x, month?

Cel \| 41 \| Gaykhau \| 242 \| 198-208 \| 6:15 \| 0 \[90\] off-flan 6\[9\]4, month?

Ss! \| 42 \| Gaykhatu \| 24 \| 199202 \| 12:15 \|" \| x off-flan \[69\]x, month?

| Gel | 43 | Gaykhau | 2.45 | 19.3202 | 7:45 | x |
|:--- |:--- | ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 0 | effaced |  |  |  |  |  |
| \[69\]2? Month? | Centripetal |  |  |  |  |  |
| 44 | Gaykhatu | 2.43 |  |  |  |  |

Gel \| 45 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.37 \| 20.2-20.6 \| 5:30 \| 600? 90? off-flan tonite 69x, month? effaced

| Gel | 46 | Gaykhatu | 2.37 | 19.2209 | 9:30 | 600? |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- | ---: |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| effaced | off-flan |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Sc! | 47 | Gaykhatu | 2.38 | 203-208 | 5:00 | effaced | x بي‎ |
| of | ofefian |  |  |  |  |  |  |

9 A 48 \| Gaykhatu \| 2.45 19.8-20.3 6:30 off-flan off-flan effaced year? \[69\]x, month?

| 81 | 49 | Baydu | 245 |
|:--- |:--- | ---: |:--- |
| 19.6-21 | 6:00 | 600 |  |

82 \| 50 \| Baydu \| 2.37 \| 203-222 \| 12:15 \| off-flan \| off-flan \| x effaced \[69\]x, month?
83 \| 51 \| Baydu \| 245 \| 199-206 \| 8:15 \| 600 \[90\] \[42\] Shawwal 6\[94\]? Shawwal --- --- Fig 48 Fig 49 Fig 51

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics Data for the Weight Indices of the Georgian-Hulagid Christian dirhams from the Dikhashkho Hoard

| In the name of | In the name |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Parameter | dirhams | Arghun |

Mean 2.40 2.40 2.40 2.42 Median 2.40 2.40 2.40 2.45 قات‎ 0.05 Deviation Skewness -0.36 0.04 -1.49 -1.73 Minimum 2.20 2.23 2.20 2.37 Maximum 2.61 2.61 2.45 Sample Size

Table 3. Die analysis summary for the Dikhashkho hoard.

ObverseIlkhan n do dr n/d, n/d, reverse dies ratio Arghun 1.09 Argh & > \|١ \|2 1:1 Qazan Gaykhatu\_\| LS, 1.05 1:1.43 Baydu 1.5 LS Total 1.31 1.06 1:1.23