# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY JULY 1977

# INFORMATION SHEET NO. 18

Barly Arab Coins of Tunisia The Fatimids of Ifriqiyah and their successors up to the

establishment of Hafsid rule - 296-625 AH (909-1228 A.D) By M.L. Tarizzo Historical Background

The Fatimids of Ifriciyah, 296-362 AH (909-973 AD)

The Fatimids claimed to be the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad and took

their dynastic name from Fatimah, daughter of the Prophet and wife of 'Ali, his cousin and fourth Caliph, They were part of the Shi'ite branch of Islam, which recognises the descendants of 'Ali as the only legitimate successors to Muhammad and to the Caliphate. The founder of the dynasty, 'Ubsid Allah, came originally from Salamiysh in Syria, where the Isma'ili movement had arisen in opposition to the Abbasid Caliphs., The Isma'ilis consider Ima'il, and not his brother Musa, as the seventh Imam or "Leader" and, in contrast to the Shi'ite sects recognizing a succession of twelve Imams, they consider Isma'il as the last of the "declared" Imams, before the advent of the Mahdi, the "guided one",

About 280 AH (893 AD) one of 'Ubaid Allah's followers, Abu 'Abd Allah, finding

the Kotama pilgrims receptive to his preaching, joined them when they returned from Mecca to Kabylia, a mountainous region to the west of Ifriqiyah which the Aghlabids had never entirely managed to control, Led by Abu 'Abd Allah, the Kotama intensified their harassing of the Aghlabids, taking advantage of weakness

and sedition amongst the border garrisons. Seeing the successes of his followers in the Maghreb, 'Ubaid Allah left Syria for the west. Escaping detection by keeping south of the area controlled by the Aghlabids and their allies, he reached Sijilmassa, in western Maghreb, in 292 AH (905 AD), but was eventually detained. In 296 AH (909 AD), Abu 'Abd Allah obtained a decisive victory over the Aghlabids and occupied Kairouan, the seat of their government, He then moved westward, defeating all opposition, liberated 'Ubaid Allah and led him to Kairouan to pro-

claim himself early in 297 AH (910 AD) the Mshdi, the Rightful Caliph, the Iman, thus breaking the wnity of the Caliphate which up to then had been maintained at the religious if not at the political level, Aby 'Abd Allah was involved in 298 AH (911 AD) in an attempt to overthrow 'Ubaid Allah and was executed.. This sparked off a series of abortive rebellions among his original followers in southwestern Ifriqiyah, Tripoli and Sicily.

The establishment of Fatimid rule in Ifriqiyah was for 'Ubaid Allah only a

beginning toward the attainment of his ultimate objective of overthrowing the Abbasid Caliphate. In 301 AH 913 AD) and again in 307 AH (919 AD) he sent expeditions against Egypt, led by his son Abu-l-Qasim, After initial successes and the occupation of Alexandria they were forced to return to Ifriqiyah. In 310 AH (922 AD) 'Ubaid Allah turned to the west and brought under his control most of

the Maghreb, including the regions of Fez and Sijilmassa, up to the limits of the region controlled by the Sunnite 'Umayyads of Spain, who had established in 300AH

## (912 AD) an independent Caliphate in Cordoba in opposition to the Abbasid Caliphs.

During these military campaigns, the town of al-Mahdiyah was founded on the eastem

coast of Ifriqiyah, and the seat of the government was moved there from Kairouan in 309.AH (921 AD), reflecting both the growing attention given to sea trade and sea power, and the main direction of the Fatimid expansion.

''Ubaid Allah was succeeded by his son Abu-l-Qasim al-Qaim who continued his father's policies. Another expedition was sent to Egypt, with the same results and during his reign Berber corsairs started to raid the northemcoast of the Mediterranean, --- oe

The cost of these forays resulted in heavy taxation which eventually produced open rebellion in the shape of a revival of Kharijism. The opposition first manifested itself in the south where it was repressed, but the dissidents led by Abu Yazid, moved to the west of Ifriqiyah from where they invaded the northern and central parts of Ifriqiyah and, with the help of the orthodox Sunnite population, occupied Kairouan, By 334 AH (945 AD) only al-Mahdiyah remained in the hands of the Fatimids and the town itself was under siege for several months. Eventually the Fatimids under 51-0813255 son Isma'il defeated the poorly organised rebel bands, thus putting an end to Kharijism and asserting the supremacy of the sedentary Berbers over the nomads who had traditionally opposed them, Taking the name of al-Mansur, the "made Victorious" Isma'il reestablished Fatimid rule over Ifriqiyah and territories further west. To celebrate his victory, in 337 AH (948 AD) he gave the name of Al-Mansuriyah to the new.town which he had founded on the site of the old Berber Sabra, next to Kairouan, while the latter was still in rebel hands,

Under the next ruler, al-Mu'izz, Fatimid control was extended in the west as far as Tangier and Ceuta, In the east, a successful campaign was finally launched against Egypt which was conquered in 358 AH (969 AD). A new capital, al-Qahira (Cairo) was founded there in 362 (972 AD), near the old provincial capital of alFustat, and in the same year the Fatimid Caliph moved there the seat of his government, appointing as governor of Ifriqiyah Bulukkin Yusuf abu-l-Patuh ibn Ziri, a Sanhajid Berber from central Maghreb. The Zirid Period 362-543 AH (973-1148 AD)

The transfer of the Fatimid government and the advent of the Zirids, who

established their capital at Kairouan, was marked by unrest and revolts, including one in Kairouan itself in 369 AH (979 AD) led by \*Abd Allah, a descendant of the Aghlabids. Yusuf's successor, his son abu-l-Qasim al-Mansur, 373-386 AH (984-996 AD), consolidated his control over the region, put down a Fatimid inspired revolt of the Kotamas and thereby ensured that the Sanhajids became the most powerful Berber tribe in eastern Maghreb, During this period of Zirid rule, Ifriqiyah prospered, agriculture was developed and taxes were reduced. However, under abu Munad Badis, 386-406 AH (996-1016 AD), difficulties developed over relations with the Hammadids, a separate branch of the family who under Hammad, uncle of the Zirid ruler seceded in 405 AH (1014 AD) and took control of the region to the west of Ifriqiyah. Badis tried without success to obtain the support of the Caliph in Cairo but his enemies were aided instead, iri order to prevent the Zirid rulers from becoming too strong and independent,

The point of rupture with the Fatimid Caliphate was reached in 441 AH (1049 AD) when abu Tamin al-Mu'izz, 406-454 AH (1016-1062 AD) proclaimed his allegiance to the Sunni Abbasid Caliphs of Baghdad, In retaliation the following year, the Fatimid Caliph of Cairo unleashed against the Zirids the Banu Hilal, a troublesome tribe from western Egypt. They invaded Ifriqiyah destroying everything on their path, at first with the help of the Hammadids who were however

eventually forced by the invaders to withdraw to the west. The entire region was ravaged, agricultural developments were destroyed, nomadism reintroduced with plunder becoming a way of life. The period of instability and insecurity thus started was to last for almost two centuries while most of the region was controlled by a succession of local rulers with shifting allegiances,

On the basis of the very limited numismatic evidence, it appears that the Zirids remained in control of the towns of Kairouan and of al-Mahdiyah for a few years

at least and that in 449 AH (1057 AD) their zone of influcence included Sfax. The coins also indicate that in the same year 449 the Zirids recanted and again proclaimed the supremacy of the Fatimid Caliph, possibly in an attempt to obtain his help against the invaders, --- aS aa

No historical evidence has been found of such contacts between Zirids and

Fatimids and the region under Zirid control continued to be limited to al-Mahdiyah

itself with, at times, the towns of Kairouan, Sousse, Sfax, Tumis and Gabés, all occasionally also under the rule of more or less independent Berber or Arab

chieftains. The interior remained under the control of the nomad tribes,

The Zirids were soon faced with another danger, this time from the sea, Taking advantage of the crumbling Arab power, the Normans had started the conquest of Sicily, from their bases in southern Italy. They occupied Pante lleria in 481 AH (1088 AD) and by 484 AH (1091 AD) had ousted the Arabs from the whole of Sicily. Led by Roger II, the Normans then obtained a first foothold in North Africa on

the island of Djerba in 519 AH (1125 AD) and gradually extended their control to most of the eastern coast of Ifriqiyah. They finally took al-Mahdiyah, Sfax and Sousse - all that remained of the Zirid territory - in 543 AH (1148 AD) and the last of the Zirids, abu Yahya al-Hasan ibn 'Ali, was obliged to eseape into exile by sea from al-Mahdiyah,

The Period of Almohad and Almoravid Influence 543-625 AH (1148-1228 AD)

The Norman occupation of the eastern coast of Ifriqiyah was of short duration, A new movement, that of the Amohads or "Unitarians", had emerged in westerm Maghreb under 'Abd al-Mumin who had rebelled against the Almoravids and proclaimed himself Caliph, establishing his capital in Marrakesh, The Almohads rapidly extemied their control to the entire Maghreb re-establishing Moslem rule and Berber supremacy over the whole of Ifriqiyah. Tunis was taken by the Almohads in 555 AH (1159 AD) and al-Mahdiyah, the last Norman stronghold, in 556AH (1160AD).

In 580 AH (1184 AD), Almoravids from the Balearic Islands, led by the two Banu Ghanyah Brothers 'Ali and Yahya, landed on the northerncoast of the Maghreb and from there, with the support of the Abbasid Caliph and of the Banu Sulayim Arabs from Tripoli, occupied most of Ifriqiyah. Yahya set up an independent government at Gabes and occupied Tunis in 599 AH (1203 AD) but the pressure from the west was overwhelming and Almohad authority was soon re-established over the entire region.

In 604 AH (1207 AD) abu Muhammad 'Abd al-Wahid - son of 'Umar ibn Hafs who had been one of the original supporters of 'Abd al-Mumin ~ was appointed Governor of Ifriqiyah by the fourth Almohad Caliph, Muhammad al-Nasiribn Yaqub, and established his capital in Tunis, His son Faris succeeded him in 618 AH (1221 AD) but was deposed by his own brother abu Zakariah Yahya in 625 AH (1228 AD). Abu Zakariah gradually broke his links with the Almohad Caliphate and set up an independent Hafsid state in Tunis, which was to last until the Ottoman protector ate began in 982 AH (1574 AD). Description of the Coins

Fatimid Coins of Ifriqiyah 296-459 AH (909-1067 AD)

Only coins minted within the region corresponding to what is today known as Tunisia are considered here. This series includes coins issued by the Zirid governors after the transfer of the Fatimid Caliphate to Cairo in 362 AH, with the exception of those of the period between 439 and 449 AH which, because of their differences and historical significance are described separately. "Mintless" Fatimid coins dated after 362 AH and not otherwise attributable to Ifriqiyah are

not included, A summary of relevant data is given in Table 1.1.

Both gold and silver coins are known, but no copper coins of this period have been described, The series is typical of the classical Arab period with legends in Kufic script. Anat from some fractional gold coins, all have a circular marginal legend on each side, surrounding other horizontal or circular legends, and are characterized by the presence of concentric circles separating the legends. Coins of different rulers usually differ not only in their wording but also in the arrangement of legends and circles, --- ee

The size and weight of the gold coins are similar to those of the early post-

reform coins, but there is a tendency for dinars to become slightly larger and thimmer toward the end of this period, possibly so that longer inscriptions could be better accommodated; their weight however remains the same, at a little less than 4.2 grams. Fractional dinars are basically similar, but their legends are somewhat simpler and their size and weight show more variation. Silver "dirhams" are less common than gold coins and tend to be scarcer for

later rulers, They are similar to gold coins in general appearance but show a certain variation in size and weight,

## Four mint-names occur on coins of this series, Al--Qayrawan (Kairovan), al

Mahdiyah (Mahdia), al-Mansuriyah (situated next to Kairouan) and, on a single

coin dated 414 AH, Zwila (a suburb of Mahdia). According to recorded dates, Fatimid gold dinars were minted in Kairouan only until 306 AH. When the seat of the government was moved to the newly founded al-Mahdiyah, coins were minted there from 311 to 459 AH and in al-Mansuriyah from 338 to 438 AH, the period of prominence of this other Fatimid centre. In addition to the early issues, the name of Kairouan appears on two dinars dated 333 AH and 335 AH, The first, Similar in general appearance to Fatimid coins but with different legends, was

struck during the occupation of Kairouan by Abu 785104 and his followers, The coin dated 335 AH was posthumously issued in the name of the Amir al-Qaim by his successor al-Mu'izz, who refused to assume the title of Imam and to strike coins in his own name before putting an end to the Kharijite rebellion. This reappearance of Kairouan as a Fatimid mint might well have represented a way of marking the restoration of Fatimid contral over the city and the appearance of al--Mansuriyah as a new mint shortly afterwards emphasizes the importance again

given to the region of Kairouan, hitherto somewhat neglected in favour of Mahdia.

Fractional gold coins from al-Mahdiyah are dated from 316 AH to 412 AH or 450 AH,

5 questionable date, and those from al-Mansuriyah from 340 to 436 AH.

Silver coins struck in Kairouan are know, dated 296, 308 and 332 AH. Silver coins from al-Mahdiyah are dated from 316 to 401 AH and those from Al-~Mansuriyah from 352 to 376 AH with one additional but doubtful coin of 432 AH,

The relationship in value between the dinar and the dirham, originally 1:10, had gradually increased to about 1:16 under al-Mu'izz. Under al-Hakim it rose to 1:26 in 395 AH and to 1:34 in 397 AH. During his reign, new dirhams of heavier weight were issued and their relationship to the dinar was brought back to 1:16.

Accepting the usual convention that the obverse of the coin is the side with

## the first part of the "kalimah" (the statement of Moslem faith or "Muhammadan

symbol"), almost all coins of this period have the "second symbol" (Koran IX,33) in the marginal legend of the obverse, and the "bismillah" (the mint and date

formula) in the marginal legend of the reverse. One exception is provided by the early issues of al-Qaim on which the bismillah, placed as a circular legend on the reverse, is surrounded by another religious legend (Koran VI,115). The early coins issued by al-Mansur on his own name in 336-337 AH also differ in having the"second symbol" on the reverse and the bismillah on the obverse, From 338 AH all personal names and titles are on the reverse. Additional religious legends appear on the first coins of this series issued by abu 'Abd Allah - on which there are no personal names or titles - and on the coin of al--Mu'izz.

There are some differences in the form in which names and titles are given on

the coins issued by various rulers, but all coins issued after the advent of the Mahdi show the honorary title or "lakab" of the ruler, the title "Amir alMuminin", Commander of the Believers and, with the exception of the fractional

gold of al-Tahar, the title "al-Imam", the Leader, --- age, ee

The term "'Abd Allah" on the coins of al-Mahdi could be considered as an

epithet, "Slave ofGod", but might also refer to his proper name, 'Ubaid Allah, which has the same origin. 'Abd Allah also appears on the coins of al-Mansur. After the transfer of the seat of the Caliphate to Cairo, the formula "Slave

of God and His favourite" is used before the name of the Caliph on coins issued in the name of al-'Aziz, al-Hakim and al-Zahir, The formula used for the title may be "Billah" (with, by God), "bi amr Allah" (by the commandment of God", 8 din Allah" ( by the faith of God) or "li'izaz din Allah" (by the power of the faith of God), Finally, on the coins minted in Ifriqiyah by the Zirid Governors in the name of the Caliph, one name or letter is to be found in the central field of the reverse,

General Description of Fatimid Coins of Ifriqiyah. Standard Legends 1, Kalimah (the "word" or "Muhammad symbol") ia There is no god but God ALI) MI GU) بد‎

## 1b who has no associate as a \* ao &

2a Muhammad is the Apostle of God \} Sui ر‎ Sig Sears

## 2b 'Ali is the favourite of God AA \| 7 9 fe 2.  Koran IX 33 (the "second symbol")

## Muhammad is the prophet of God sent dw pA) رسو ل‎ Soro

## with guidance and the religion of uw, DS 9 5 ysgol

| truth, to make it prevail over ةرهاظيل | على‎ | Sa! |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| every other religion, averse although و | لى‎ al | C2. الى‎ |
| idolaters may be | 9% كرة | رشملا‎ |

## every other religion, averse although و لى‎ al C2. الى‎

# idolaters may be 9% كرة رشملا‎ Mint Names

| Kairouan (al-Qayrawan) | ou \\| 9 es \\ |
|:--- |:--- |
| Mahdia (al-Mahdiyah) بك‎ | Soll |
| Mansuriya (al-Mansuriyah) | day Hod) \\| |
| Zwila | aly فى‎ |

## Mahdia (al-Mahdiyah) بك‎ Soll Mansuriya (al-Mansuriyah) day Hod) \|

## Zwila aly فى‎ Typical Coins Issued by each Ruler

The asterisk (\*) refers to the standard legends given above. abu 'Abd al-Shi'i 296-297 AH (909-910 AD)

Similar in appearance to Aghlabid coins. Classical Kufic script. No circles. One marginal legend on each side, Central legends in 3 or 5 horizontal lines, Obv. Circular legend? Central, line 1,2,3 (Kalimah 1a, 1b) \* ornament below Rev. Circular legend (bismillah) Central line 1????

## Glory ةةيريدعل‎ ١ to God A\)

## master of the world aad العا‎ ge --- 2nd Type: Obv. Circular legend Central, Line 1 Circular legend Central, line 24 1,5 Rev. ne ee Similar but legends changed. (Koran IX, 33) The glory (kalimah 18, 1b) العر

# is a proof of God حجه الله‎ (bismilleh) \* (kalimah 2a) \* May the enemies of AU! Inc\} 9 p24 god be scattered

abu Muhammad 'Ubaid Allah al-Mahdi billah 297-322 AH (910-934 AD)

Similar to above, but circular legends between 2 circles. Obv. Circular legend Central, line 2,3,4 Rev. Circular legend Central, line 2,3,4 (Koran IX, 33) (kalimah 1a, 1d) "Abd Allah Amir al-Muminin (bismillah) (kalimah 2a)

## al-Imam / billah

abu al-Qasim Muhammad al-Qaim billah, 322-334 AH (934-946 AD)

Obverse similar to coins of al-Mahdi, Reverse with two circular legends, Central legend in 5 lines. No circles on reverse, Script more ornamental with appearance of "floral" letters, Gold Coins

Obv. Circular legend (Koran IX, 33) Central, line 3,4 (kalimah 1a, 1b) \* te Muhammad/abu al-Qasim ابو القسيم‎ te

## al-Mahdi billah Rev. Outer circular legend Inner circular legend Central, line 3,4 (Koran VI,115) The words of thy Lord are perfect in truth and justice; there is none who can change His words: He both heareth and knoweth

## (bismillah) (kalimah 2a) al-Iman al--Qaim bi amr Allah Amir al-Muminin

# و ثمث!‏dol ىبر

# ‏oy هاو N ‏cs

# لك LALO J so‏ 45

# و مهو!‏oca

## ‏S \| يلعلم \* \* \* --- Silver coins Obv. As on gold coins

Rev. As on gold coins but without outer circular legend, Remaining circular legend inscribed within 2 circles, abu Yazid, rebel issue of 333 AH (945 AD)

Similar to the coins of al-Qaim, but 2 circles on reverse as well. Obv. Circular legend Central, line 3,4 Rev. Outer circular legend Inner circular legend Central, line 2,3,4,

( bismillah) - ضر ب‎  ee ga \\ cya J الله‎ oases (kalimah 1a, 1b) \*

## Our Lord is God

AL) \| Way all government is God's حم اد لله‎ N

# The Truth, the manifest One الحق المبين‎

## (Koran IX,33)

5 ١ (Koran VII, 156) Those who اموا به و‎ cn فا‎

## believe in Him, and honour 909 ~Q عر روه و‎

## Him, and assist Him, and

Sly Wl) ا وحبيت‎ follow the light which has AS او‎ Az انزل‎

## been sent down with Him, shall هم وحلفملا ن‎ be happy

## (kalimah 2a)

Glory be to God لله'‎ os Seal of the Prophets' خا نييبثلارهت‎

abu Zahir Isma'il al-Mansur billah, 334-341 AH (946-953 AD) ist type (335 AH): As the coins of al-Qaim and' issued in his name,

2nd \_ type (336-337 AH) In his own name, On each side one circular legend and central legends in 4 lines. Three concentric circules surrounding the legends, with annulus between the two inner circles, Obv. Circular legend Central, line 2,3 Rev. Circular legend Central, line 2,3 (bismillah, with month) \* (kalimah 1a) \*

## al-Imam al-Mansurbillah AU روصنملا يا‎ (Koran IX,33) \* (kalimah 2a) \* Isma'il tow Amir al-Muminin \*

3rd type (338-341 AH): Design similar to 2nd type. Obv. Circular legend Central line 1,2,3 Rev. Circular legend Central, line 1 (Koran IX,33) (kalimah 1a, 1b, 2a) \*

## (bismillah, without month)

\* 'Abd Allah WJ) دبع‎ يعمبسال \| لد مام li'amsI ‏mamI-la
## 3rd type (Continued) روصنملا ا لله al-Mansur billah‏ 3 Amir al-Muminin \*

abu Tamim Ma'add al-Mu'iss ladin Allah, 341-365 AH (953-975 AD)

Three circular legends delimited by four circles with a point in centre, Fractional dinars similar but one less legend and circle, Obv. Outer legend (Koran IX,33) \*

## Middle legend and 'Ali is the most الو‎ pos ede § distinguished of the agents and Se )99 CHAO minister of the best of the سلين‎ yo l pa messengers Inner legend (kelimah 1a, 1b) \* Rev. Outer legend (bismillah) \*

Middle The Imam Ma'add summons \>XKHo مام‎ Nic > all men to the profession لنو يل ألا لك‎ of the unity of the soars \|

eternal God Inner al-Mu'igz ladin Allah Amir زعملا لذين الله امبر‎

# e1-Muminin المو مئنبين‎

abu Mansur Nizar al-'Aziz billah, 365-386 AH )976-996 AD)

Two concentric circular legends each between two circles: a fifth circle around

a point in the middle. An annulus each side of inner legend,

Obv. Outer circular legend (Koran IX,33) Inner circular legend (kalimah 18, و28‎ 2b) \*

Rev. Outer circular legend (bismillah) \* Inner circular legend Slave of God and His Au) 9 9 لله‎ \| ic favourite Nizar al-Imam دز 5 الل ما م‎ al-'Aziz billah Amir al- امير‎ AN اي N ريَرعلا ‎

abu 'Ali al-Mansural-Hakim bi amr Allah, 386-411 AH (996-1021 AD): Two concentric legends between circles with annulus between, Central legend in 2 horizontal lines, Obv. Outer circular legend (Koran IX, 33) \* Inner circular legend (kalimah 1a, 1b) \* Central, line 1,2 (Kalimah 2a, 2b) \* Rev. Outer circular legend (Bismillah) \*

Inner circular legend Slave of God and His Aud الله و و‎ Ne favourite al-Mansur abu لمنصو\_ و0 \| دوق‎ ١ Ali al=Iman مام‎ S dc
## ist type

(Continued). Central, line 1 al-Hakim bi amr Allah AMA, الحأ كم‎ Amir al-¥uminin \*

2nd Type: (posthumous): One circular legeni, central legend in 4 horizontal lines, Threecircles delimiting the legends, with annulus between the two inner circles, Obv. Circular legend (Koran IX,33)

Central, line 1,2.3,4 (kalimah 1a,1b,2a,2b) \* Rev. Circular legend (bismillah) \*

Central line 1 Slave of God and His favourite 81-1 الله و و ليه الك‎ Se

## mam al-Hakim by the commandment of God A \| الله‎ yolk مام مكاحل‎

## mir al-Muminin and slave of the pl sics منين‎ yo)! 0

most merciful guardian of the faith of حيم و لى عهن نيملسملا‎ the moslems

2 Dinar: Three horizontal lines on each side surrounded by double circle.

Obv. Central, line 1,2,3 (kalimah 1a, 2a, 2b) \* Rev. Central, line 1 al-Mansur روصسملا‎

## abu al~Imam ple J) yp! Amir al-Muminin \*

abu al-Hasan 'Ali al-Zahir li'izaz din Allah, 411-427 AH (1021-1036 AD) Similar to ist type of al-Hakim except for:

Rev. Inner circular legend Slave of God and His AWS الله و و‎ de

## favourite abu al-Hasan ere \[ ايو‎ "Ali al-Imam plo NS) علخ‎

Central, line 1 al-Zahir li 'izaz din iw عزاز د‎ N50 US) \|

## Allah Amir al-Muminin.نينم‎ yo)! الله امير‎

+ Dinar: One circular legend between circles and one central legend in 3 lines. Obv. Circular legend (Koran IX,33) \* Central, line 1,2,3 (kalimah 1a, 2a, 2b) \*

Rev. Circular legend (bismillah) \* Central, line 1 al-Zahir الظا هر‎

## 11 "12582 din Allah Whe 3 لل عراز‎ Amir al-Muminin \*

abu Tamim Ma'add al-Mustansir billah, 427-487 AH (1036-1094 AD)

Similar to 2nd type of al-Hakim, but central legends in 3 or 4 lines, Obv. Circular legend (Koran IX,33) \*

Central, line 1,2,3,4 (kalimah 1a,1b, 2a, 2b) \* line 2, with kalimah ib, may be missing).
## 10 $$ = $$ Rev. Circular legend (bismillah) \* Central, line 1 al-Iman د‎ \* Ma'add abu Tamim \*

# al-Mustansir billah نا لله‎ pero) Amir al-Muminin \* (line 2 may be missing)

Independent Zirid coins, 439-449 AH (1047-1057 AD)

The Zirid governors of the eastern Maghreb continued to issue coins in the name of the Fatimid Caliphs till 438 AH, but in 439 and 440 AH two minor but

significant changes occurred, al-lahdiyah disappearedas a mint name and, instead of al-Mansuriyah, the old Berber name of Sabrah was used, a clear indication of dissent from Fatimid confornity,

These first changes were soon followed by more drastic ones, On coins dated from 441 to 449 AH the name of the Caliph and the Shi'ite formulas disappear and are replaced by Sunnite legends, in accordance with the proclaimed allegiance to the Abbasid Caliph, Kairouan now replaces Sabrah as the mint and its importance as a centre of orthodoxy is stressed by the formula used, In 441 AH the relationship of the dinar to the dirham was fixed at 1:35. Dinars of this type were minted toward the end of this period in al-Mahdiyah - which curiously enough retained its name = and in Sfax, after the Banu Hilal invasion had rendered the control of the interior by the Zirids precarious,

The coins of true Fatimid type minted in al-Mahdiyah from 449 AH to 459 AH are included in the preceding section. A summary of available data on the independent Zirid coins is given in Table 1.2. The coins correspond to the following general description:
# 439-440 AH (1047-1048 AD)

Similar to earlier coins issued in Ifriqiyah in the name of al-Mustansir except for mint-name, Sabrah © صبر‎

# 441-449 AH (1049-1057 AD)

## Arrangement of legends and circles similar to above

Obv. Circular legend (Koran XXXIII, 44) Oh, انا‎ og كن بهذا‎

## thou prophet, we have

\| Sees AS ow ار‎ sent thee as a witness \\ pw 9 \| iyo 3

## and a herald of good الله‎ Jl lclo 9 tidings and a warner and a summoner to God Central line, 1,2,3 (kalimah 1a, 1b, 2a) \*

## Rev.

Circular legend (bismillah, but: «ein the city of the power pre Se Au بول‎. of Islam, al-Qayrawan....) معب‎ cyl 9 Paes Central, line 1 (Koran III, 79) and whoever desires other CRU, من‎ than Islam as a faith Wy, \> pie الل‎ that it will not be dio pa فلن‎ accepted from Him
## Other mint names al-Mahdiyah Ey 53-0) \|

## Safaqus (Sfax) pro low du مل‎ Coins issued by Local Rulers

Apart from those issued by the Zirids, very few coins have been described for

the period of instability between the ill-fated attempt of the Zirids to break away from Fatimid sovereignty and the establishment of Hafsid rule,

The fact that so few coins have survived suggests either that few were minted,

or that those which were issued were soon melted down, or both. The interruption of the traditional trade with Africa south of the Sahara probably produced a shortage of bullion quite apart from the lack of adequate infrastructures for striking and issuing the coins, Continual changes in allegiances would discredit the coins in circulation and the limited range of effective control exercised by local chieftains would discourage trade. Finally, those coins which were in circulation in the region during this period were probably withdrawn by the Almohads when they occupied Ifriqiyah, and the metal used for their newly reformed coinage.

The few coins which have been described are listed in Table 1.3 and correspond to the following description:=

Hammu ibn Malil, Berber governor of Sfax, 451-493 AH (1059-1100 AD)

One gold dinar dated 461 AH, similar in appearance to Fatimid coins of that period. On each side, one circular legend am3 horizontal lines. In contrast to Fatimid coins, the central legend of the reverse has the religious quotation used by the imdependent Zirids (Koran III, 79) and no personal names are given. 057.  Circular legend (Koran IX,33) \* Central, line 1,2,3 (kalimah 1a, 1b, 2a) \*

## Rev. Circular legend

(bismillah) \* (mint name): a' Ta Safaqus (Sfax) مسن‎ law Central line, 1 (Koran, III,79) and whoever desires other عر‎ RA مرح د‎

## than Islam as a faith

ly Sd م‎ Nw ألا‎ that it will not be Aro Jas قلى‎ accepted from Him ou

Rashid ibn Rashid, Arab governor of Gabes, 5xx-554 AH (115x-1159 AD)

One gold dinar dated 551 AH; appearance similar to above, but legends different, Same religious legend as on independent Zirid coins (Koran, III,79) but no "second symbol" (Koran IX, 33). Name of the governor given on the obverse, below the kalimah, The bismillah also shows some variations from the usual formula: "al-Rahman" added after "In the name of God", and "'am" instead of "sanah" in the date.

Obv. Circular legend (Koran 111,79 - see above - but continuing further):

## and in the next life he

6 ae و 92 فن الك‎ shall be of those who, الا‎ 0 كد‎ gs مييق لقان‎ perish --- - - \| Central, line 1,2 (kalimah 1a, 1b) \*

## al-Amir al-Rashid ate yp دعر‎ NI ibn Rashid; 5" eye

## Rev. Circular legend

(bismillah), reading حمن ضر به.. يقاس عأم:‎ yl الله‎ pay Central, line i al-Imam \* slave Swe of God ذلك‎ ١ Amir al=-Muminin Norman Coins

During their relatively short presence in Ifriciyah, the Normans issued coins

similar to the Fatimid pieces then in circulation, with legends naming the Norman Princes crudely written in Arabic. Only a few of these coins have been described. Roger II

One gold dinar dated 543 AH, Legends arranged within four concentric circles delimiting the two circular legends, with narrow amulus between second and

third circle; central legend in two lines, 057.  Outer circular legend Struck by commandment of بأمر ىلملا المعظم‎ upd

## the king extolled, Roger, لله بمى دنه‎

Le 'viz N\\ lay exultant by God, in the Reig \<Ae du Sean

## town of al-Mahdiyah in the Ay ار يعين انهضووتفع‎ year 543

## Inner circular legend

Praise to God the True one o حمل‎ (g> دمحلا الله‎

praise as He is meriting Asi. هو \| هلد وه‎ tae

## and deserving Central legend, line 1 the King oT va tt

## 2 Roger 85 حا‎

Rev. Circular legends as on the obverse Central legend, line 1 exultant pra) \| 2 by God William I

## One gold dinar dated 549 AH, similar to above.

Obv. Outer circular legend Struck by commandment of =. نتيأ مرانها‎ "9 the leader, by commandment لم‎ ne ita مرا لله‎ of God, king William in the dius» بك‎ yea \| Aus a

## town of al-Mahdiyah in thabyuo\> PAU ار‎ 5 pe year 549

## Inner circular legend as on coin of Roger II Central,legend, line 1 the king +e

## 2 William pr Lhe --- $$ = $$ AS ce

## Rev. Circular legends as on obverse لجنا فم كن‎ Central legend, line 1 the leader

# 2 by commandment of God نأ مر الله‎ Coins Issued in Ifrigi by the Almohads

In 541 AH the Almohads introduced in North Africa and in Spain significant

changes in the traditional Arab coinage which had followed practically the same pattern since the 'Umayyad reform of ca, 76 AH. The new Almohad dinar maintained a diameter of between 19 and 22mm, but its weight was reduced to 3.4 grams. The legends were arranged within a square inscribed in a circle thus producing four peripheral segments which were also utilized for legends, A square silver dirham was introduced and instead of Kufic a cursive Naskhi

Script adopted for all coins, The legends were also changed, the traditional "symbols" and the quotationsfrom the Koran being replaced by dedications to the Mahdi and by more complete names of the ruler, and of his heir. The "bismillah" itself disappeared and the mint-name, when given, was added in small characters at the bottom of the legends in the square, the date being omitted altogether,

From the point of view of Tunisian history and numismatics, a significant event was the first appearance of the name of Tunis on coins, with two dinars minted

there between the conquest of the town by the Almohads in 555 AH and 563 AH;

the first in the name of the Almohad Caliph 'Abd al-Mu'min, and the second in the name of the Caliph Yusuf, before he assumed the title of Amir al-Muminin.. It is likely that many of the numerous mintless Almohad dinars of this period were struck in eastern Maghreb, and it may be assumed that only coins conforming

to the new standards were in circulation there during the period of Almohad supremacy. With regard to silver coins, a relatively large number of anonymous square dirhams exist from Tunis, Apart from those with legends in ornamented Kufic, which was not used by the Almohads, their differentiation from later Hafsid coins of similar appearance is difficult. On one of these square dirhams which cannot definitely be attributed, the mint of Jarbah (Djerba) can be read, Gold Coins

Central double square within marginal double line, the inner continuous and the outer dotted,

abu Mohammad 'Abd al-Mu'min ibn Ali, 524-558 AH (1130-1163 AD)

## Obv. Central legend in 3 lines 1 There is no god but ea re

## 2 God Muhammad لله نىمحم‎ ١

## 3 is the Apostle of God ر سمو ر الله‎

## bottom line, small characters Tunis تو نيدن‎

segments: top In the name of the merciful the compassionate pax pl com لله الر‎ \| jor left God bless uhammad yoo de الله‎ eo

## bottom and his family the noble ه اله نيبرطلا‎

## right the pure ones لطا نيبرم‎ \} Rev, Central legend in 3 lines

## line The Mahdi Iman المهرى امام‎

## of the community upright po لقا‎ he N\\

in the commandment of God الله‎ pl bottom line, small characters: Tunis

## cps بق‎ --- 44 ب

## segments: top

abu Muhammad 4 ايو محمى عيبل‎ left \| al-Mu'min ibn 614 و على‎ gas)

## bottom Commander of the believers "coe امير المو‎

## right

praise to God Lord of all created beings بىحلا (لهدرب العا نسبمل‎

abu Yagub Yusuf I ibn 'Abd al-Mu'min 558-563 AH (1163-1184 AD) as Amir Obv. Central legend in 4 lines

line 1 In the name of the merciful the compassionate pin حمن الر‎ yl سدم الله‎ there is no God but God ays 3 leaf N

Muhammad is the Apostle of God: A\) \ 3 محم حل زا سر‎

the Mahdi Imam of the comunity امام ا مه‎ 58 yo) \| bottom line, small characters: Tunis is 3 segments: left \| God the only one >= لله5ط‎ bottom there is no god but He yo YI AI N

## right the merciful the compassionate حمن الر حيم‎ p top and the sovereign الهم‎ is Rev. Central legend in 4 lines

## line 1

upright in the commandment of God لقا نمم يامر الله‎ \| the Kaliph abu Muhammad Sorte وب‎  ١ SI

| 'Abd al-Mu'min ibn 'Ali | se لمو من | نب‎  ١He |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Commander of the believers | pro المى‎ | pol |
| segments: left | abu Yaqub | ws phe ابو‎ |

## Commander of the believers pro المى‎ pol segments: left abu Yaqub ws phe ابو‎

bottom Yusuf son of cy بو سرف‎ right commander of the believers ءرينم‎ a ) Sov

top the highest commander be J ريم ١ ‎ $$ \) $$ Silver Coins

Anonymous square dirhams in Naskhi script, with Tunis or Djerba as mint-names, and no date. 059.  Legend in 3 horizontal lines

Line 1 There is no God but God "كله‎ YY api لك‎

## the whole commandment is unto God فد‎ aly الل مر‎

## there is no strength but from God LS) " لد كو‎

Rev. Legend in 3 horizontal lines Line God is our Lord bu < لله‎ ١

## Muhammad our Apostle لذا‎ yr) So?

## the Mahdi our Imam امامنا‎ 5 Sea! Mint-names:

beneath legend of obverse or of reverse Tunis Pw yp beneath legend of reverse Djerba Ay

Pertinent data on the above coins are given in Table 1.4 --- Table 1 0 1.1 Fatimid Coins, $$ =. $$

Synopsis of coins from Ifriqiyah, 296-625 AH (909-1228 aD)

# 296-459 AH (909-1067 AD)

Ruler Diameter Weight Mint places and recorded dates (AH) in mm in g - Gold Dinars

abu 'Abd Allah $$ 18.5=20 $$ 4,12-4,18 Kairouan mintless

$$ 10=-Mahdi $$ 18-23 $$ 4.0=4,20 $$ Kairouan 500, 301, 5303-6 Mahdia 311, 3515-318, 320, 3521 mintless 297,314,318, al-Qaim 17-20 4,0-4,0 Mahdia 525, 324 nintless abu Yazid (rebel) 4.18 Kairouan

al-Mansur 18-23 3.85-4.18 Kairouan (3.15) Mahdia 336, 337,339, Mansuriya 338-341

al-Mu'izz 17-23 $$ 3.10=4.20 $$ Mahdia 353, 340, 364, 365 Mansuriya $$ 342-347,351-357,359=-3643, $$ mintless 352, 357, 360, xxx

al-'Aziz 19-1 290-40 Mahdia $$ 566, 367, 569=372, 374,575, $$ 377, 378, 5380, 581, 383, 384 Mansuriya $$ 347,368,370, 371,374=-386 $$

al-Hakim 21-24 4,0-+ 7 Mahdia 392, 396,399,401, 404,405 407,408,411,412 Mansuriya %387,394,404,408,410 mintless

al-Zahir 21-25 3 62-4.5 Mahdia 415,417,419,420, 422,424 426,429

Mansuriya 412,414,416,419-421,422 424-429, xxx Zwila

al-Mustansir 21-27 5 90-4 6 Mahdia $$ 436,437,449=451,453-457,459 $$ Mansuriyah 430-436,438, 4x4, 43x,xx6, xxx mintless xxx

## b. Gold $ Dinars abu 'Abd Allah 1.0 mintless Kairouan al-Mahdi 13-5 $$ 1.0=1,05 $$ Mahdia mintless 301,3117, xxx

al-Qaim $$ 13=16.5 $$ $$ 1,0=1.05 $$ Mahdia 330? mintless 325,328
Ruler Diameter Weight Mint vlaces and recorded dates (an) in ma in g

## b. Gold + Dinars (Continued) al-Mansur 10-7 1,0-1.45 Mahdia 537, 338, 341 Mansuriya 340,341

al-Mu'izz 14.5-16 0.99-1.10 Mahdia 34x, 560, 361, 563,364 Mansuriya 551,352,361~364 mintless 354,xxx al-'Aziz - - ~

al-Hakim 11-53 0,635-1 4 Mahdia 388, 390, 392,411,412, xxx Mansuriya 410,xxx mintless xxx

al-Zahir 11.5-13 0852-27 Mansuriya 419,423,429,xx9,xxx Mahdia Rahi'I 420 mintless no date al-lMustansir 12-6 0,80-1.19 Mahdia 450?, 4xx Mansuriya 4327,436-438 mintless xxx Ce Silver dirhams and fractions abu 'Abd Allah +1 1.36 Kairouan

##. Kairouan

al-Mahdi 16.5 1.300145 A Mahdia 316,318 mintless xxx al-Qaim 15-18 0.59,0.91, $$ 1.35=-1.75 $$ fairouan

## Mahdia 323,325, $$ 327, 328=3352 $$ mintless XXX al-Mansur 15-0 Mahdia

mintless 334,539? al Mu'izz 18-1 1.11-0 Mahdia 345,550, 552, 3556, 557, 559, Xxx 2.57-2.70

Mansuriya $$ 352,554=361,363-365,xxx $$ al-'Aziz 15-1 0,73,1.23- = Mahdua 367,370,371 5 37453754377, 1.43 379-381, 583, xxx Mansuriya 366,368, 369,376, 36x, xxx mintless Fi ty ae

al-Hakim 10.5, 0.24,1.35- Mahdia $$ 17.5=23.5 $$ 1.79,4.40- 4.77 Mansuriya xxx mintless 394, Xxx al-Zahir al-Mustansir 1.50 Mansuriya 432? --- Fah sath

1.2 Independent Zirid Coins, 439-449 AH (1047+1057 AD)

Diameter Weight Mint places and recorded dates (AH) in mn in م‎ - Gold Dinars  20-45 5.97-45 Sabrah 439,440 Kairouan  ١ 41, 442, 444-446, 8 Mahdia 446,447 Sfax - Gold + Dinar  0.80-1 2 Kairouan ©. Silver Dirham T2117 mintless xxx 1.3 Coins Issued by Local Rulers

Date Ruler Metal Diameter Weight Mint in mm in g 461 AH (1069 AD) Hammu ibn Malil gold Sfax Berber Chieftain

551 AH (1156 AD) Rashid ibn Rashid gold Gabés Arab Chieftain 543 AH (1148 AD) Roger II gold 4.15 Mahdia Norman King 549 AH (1157 AD) William I gold 4.14 fahdia Norman King 1.4 Almohad Coins, 555-625 AH (1160-1228AD)

Caliph Dates Metal Jiameter Weight in mm in g Mint

"Abd al-Mumin 524-558AH(1130-1163AD) gold \| Tunis Yusuf 558--580AH(1163-1184AD) gold Tunis anonymous - - silver 15x15 square 1.40 Tunis anonymous silver square Djerba

Table 2 Chronology of \[frigiyah between 296 and 625 AR (909-1228 AH)

## po

Occupation of Kairouan by abu 'Abd Allah al-Shi'i and end of the Aghlabid dynasty Establishment of the Fatimid Caliphate Kharijite revolt and occupation of Kairouan

Transfer of the Fatimid Calivhate from Mahdia to Cairo. Ifriqiyah ruled by Zirid governors --- $$ - - = $$ of

## Table 2 (Continued)

# AH AD J

Proclamation by the Zirid governor of allegiance to the Abbasid Caliph of Baghdad Invasion of Ifriqiyah by the Banu Hilal

Occupation of Mahdia by the Normans and end of the Zirid

## 1160 ا‎

of Mahdia by the Almohads and end of the Korman presence in Ifriqiyah

Establishment of independent Hafsid government in Tunis Fatimid Caliphs, to 487 AH (1094 aD)

| 297-5322 | 909-- 4 | abu Muhammad 'Ubaid Allah al-Mahdi billah |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 322-334 | 934-- 946 | abu al-Qasim al-jaim billah |
| 334-341 | 946-953 | abu Zahir Isma'il al-Mansur billah |
| 341-365 | 953- 975 | abu Tamim Ma'add al-Mu'izz ladin Allah |
| 365-386 | 976- 996 | abu Mansur Nizar al-'Aziz billah |
| 386-411 | 996-1021 | abu 'Ali al-Mansur al-Hakim bi amr Allah |
| 411-427 | 1021-1036 | abu al-Hasan 'Ali al-Zahir li 'izaz din Allah |
| 427-487 | 1036-1094 | abu Tamim Ma'add al--Mustansir billah | 322-334 934-- 946 abu al-Qasim al-jaim billah

334-341 946-953 abu Zahir Isma'il al-Mansur billah

341-365 953- 975 abu Tamim Ma'add al-Mu'izz ladin Allah

365-386 976- 996 abu Mansur Nizar al-'Aziz billah

386-411 996-1021 abu 'Ali al-Mansur al-Hakim bi amr Allah

411-427 1021-1036 abu al-Hasan 'Ali al-Zahir li 'izaz din Allah

427-487 1036-1094 abu Tamim Ma'add al--Mustansir billah Zirid Governors

| 362-373 | 973-984 | Yusuf abu al-Futuh al-Sanhaj |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 373-386 | 984-996 | abu al-Qasim al-Mansur |
| 386-406 | 996-1016 | abu Mumad Badis |
| 406-454 | 1016-1062 | abu Tamim al-Mu'izz ibn Badis | 373-386 984-996 abu al-Qasim al-Mansur 386-406 996-1016 abu Mumad Badis

406-454 1016-1062 abu Tamim al-Mu'izz ibn Badis

454-501 1062-1108 abu القطف‎ Tamim ibn al-Mu'izz

| 501-509 | 1108-1116 | abu Tahir 233978 152 Tamin |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 509-515 | 1116-1121 | abu al-Futuh 'Ali ibn Yahya |
| 515-543 | 1121-1148 | abu Yahya al-Hasan ibn 'Ali | 509-515 1116-1121 abu al-Futuh 'Ali ibn Yahya 515-543 1121-1148 abu Yahya al-Hasan ibn 'Ali

Almohad (Muwahhid) Caliphs to 629 AH (1232 aD)

| 524-558 | 1130-1163 | abu hphammad 'Abd al-Mumin ibn 'Ali |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| 558-580 | 1163-1184 | abu Yaqub Yusuf I ibn 'Abd al-Mumin |
| 580-595 | 1184-1199 | abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Yusuf I al-Mansur |
| 595-610 | 1199-1213 | abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad al-Nasir ibn Yaqub |
| 610-620 | 1213=\{1224 | abu Yaqub Yusuf II al-Mustansir ibn Muhammad |

558-580 1163-1184 abu Yaqub Yusuf I ibn 'Abd al-Mumin

580-595 1184-1199 abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Yusuf I al-Mansur

595-610 1199-1213 abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad al-Nasir ibn Yaqub

610-620 $$ 1213={1224 $$ abu Yaqub Yusuf II al-Mustansir ibn Muhammad

620-621 abu Muhammad 'Abd al-Wahid al-Makhlu ibn Yusuf I

621-624 1224-1227 abu Muhammad 'Abd Allah 31-4041311 ibn Yaqub

624-629 1227-1232 abu al-Ula Idris I ibn Yaqub