# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

# INFORMATION SHEET No. 27 September 1990

# A NUMISMATIC "KING-LIST" OF THE TIMURIDS

## Robert C. Grossman

According to the Sumerian King-list, the eight kings "Before the Flood" ruled 241,200 years. The reign of the Timurids was of

more modest duration; 156 years. It began with the enthronement of Timur in Samargand in A.D. 1370 and ended after the Battle of Panipat in 1526, when Babur transferred the Timurid capital to Dehli, and created a new empire in India.

The Timurids offer no single line of succession. The descendants of Timur contended for royal power whenever and wherever an opportunity presented itself. As a result, there is an untidy and confusing overlapping of reigns both geographically and chronologically. Until now, no one has devised for the numismatist a simple but comprehensive system of arrangement that takes into consideration the realities of Timurid politics.

The first attempt to devise such a system was by Stanley Lane-Poole.! he designated as ""The House of Timur" the nine principal rulers in Samarqand between A.H. 771 and 900. Four additional princes (increased to seven in a supplement) were relegated to the status of ""Governors of Provinces". When he published Mohammadan Dynasties," he again identified as "The Timurids" only those who reigned in Samarqand. Banished to an accompanying genealogical chart were several powerful

monarchs, and other lesser, but not unimportant, independent Timurid princes.

Bosworth's more recent work, The Islamic Dynasties,» essentially followed Lane-Poole: nine rulers in Samarqand were listed first and referred to as "supreme". Categories were added for "Rulers in Khurasan after Ulugh Beg's death", which placed six Timurids in their correct geographical location, while omitting at least eight others; and "Rulers in western Persia and Iraq

after Timur's death", which listed four Timurids, three of whom were, in fact, only provincial governors, while omitting at least three others who were independent.

Dr. Mitchiner in The World of Islam4 provided the names of several additional princes, some of whom were independent rulers, some of whom were not. As his predecessors, he endowed the Samarqand succession with primacy, and assigned all other Timurids to provincial "sub-dynasties".

A principal defect in these approaches is that possession of Samarqand, in and of itself, did not confer legitimate pre-

eminence over Timurid prices in other regions. Under Shah Rukh, for example, Herat was the capital of the Timurid Empire,

and Ulugh Beg ruled in Samarqand as his vassal. After Shah Rukh's death, Ulugh Beg found control of Samargand to be insufficient to deter the ambitions of his sons and nephews, each of whom felt equally entitled to rule. In the later Timurid

period, when the sons of Abu Sa'id ruled in Samarqand, even their cousin Babur, who himself avidly sought the throne of Samarqand, acknowledged:... there was in Timur Beg's territory... no ruler so great as Sultan Husain Mirza, whether by his years, armed strength, or dominions...\>

Sultan Husain never ruled in Samargand. While possession of Timur's capital and the burial site of many of his

descendants conferred an abundant measure of prestige, it cannot be maintained that the rulers there were, by definition,

supreme, or that those who reigned elsewhere were mere "provincial governors" or "sub-dynasts".

## A more logical approach is suggested by Professor John E. Woods in his study of the Aqqoyunlu.® He states that in

steppe-origin Turkish dynasties (such as the Aqqoyunlu and the Timurids) sovereignty is conceived of as a non-personal or

group possession. Each male member theoretically has an equal claim to the common patrimony by virtue of his descent from,"عل"‎ the founding ancestor. He calls this ""The Dispensation of X".

In practice, this means that civil war is often the only means of establishing the right to rule among several equally

entitled claimants. A member of the dynasty ("Y"), who, through superior virtue, fortune, or fire-power, finds himself in

control of all or a portion of the common patrimony, is naturally likely to attempt to restrict the future allocation of territories

and offices to his own descendants. Thus, in the next generation the opportunity to rule, and the prestige necessary to do so, will derive no longer by descent from "X" alone, but by descent from "X" through "Y", creating "The Dispensation of Y".

This king-list reflects the four principal Timurid dispensations; the "X" of Timur and the "Ys" of Shah Rukh, Sultan Abu Sa'id, and Sultan Husain.
Timur (no. 1) was the founding ancestor of the dynasty. His immediate dispensation extended to descendants of his only legitimate son Jehangir (d. 777), (nos. 2, 3, 4, and 5); to his son Miranshah and Miranshah's sons (nos. 6, 7, and 8); to descendants of his son Umar Shaikh (d. 796), (nos. 9, 10, and 11); and to his son Shah Rukh (no. 12). Except for the last named, none were able to establish or long maintain power for themselves.

Shah Rukh was the first great ""Y". He extended his rule over most of Timur's domains. In the quarter century after his

death, his descendants (nos. 13 through 22) were able to exploit the power of their offices and the prestige of their descent to establish several important kingdoms.

The second great "Y" was Sultan Abu Sa'id (no. 23). Although the sons of Miranshah had failed in the period 807-14 to consolidate their power, their nephew was eventually able to establish sole rule over the remaining Timurid realm. Only descendants of Sultan Abu Sa'id (nos. 24 through 33) ruled in Transoxiana after his death.

The third great "Y" was Sultan Husain (no. 34). After several false starts, this great-great-grandson of Timur, of the line of Umar Shaikh, took possession of Khorasan, and created a powerful and cultured state. Of his descendants (nos. 35 through 40. several revolted against him, and few survived him by more than a few years.

The names of over 330 Timurid princes are known. Nearly all who claimed sovereignty, and had the opportunity to practice it, exercised the right of sikka, or coinage. I have numbered all forty of those presently known either from my collection or from coins examined by Stephen Album, and have listed with an asterisk three others who, according to Stephen Album, are likely to have struck coins. Others may have done so, but to suggest names would be speculative. Some of the rulers on this list appear on the basis of only one or two specimens known (nos. 4, 27, 32, 37, 38, and 40), and of these, several are recent discoveries. Chronological and geographical information is provided as a guide for the numismatist, and is not comprehensive.

The princes' names as written on the list are more complete than will be found on the coins themselves. In most cases

the coins will show only the first of the names (e.g. "Sultan Abu Sa'id"). Where there is an exception (e.g. Muhammad

Muhsin) I have added the numismatic name in parenthesis ("Kibek Khan"). Please note that "sultan" is written only when it is

part of the ruler's actual name, as distinct from a title of rank or royal power. Verification of the proper form of these names

has been provided by Dr. Woods, who gave me the opportunity to examine a photocopy of the massive Timurid genealogy,

now located in Istanbul, prepared for Shah Rukh and up-dated by Badi' al-Zaman.

This work could not have been prepared without the generous help of Stephen Album, John Woods, and Michael Bates of the A.N.S. Notes:

1. Lane-Poole, Stanley, The Coinage of Bukhara (Transoxiana) in the British Museum. British Museum, London, 1882., pp.

3, 44-52 and Additions to the Oriental Collections 1876-1885. London, 1890, pp. 156-63.

2. Lane-Poole, Stanley, The Mohammadan Dynasties, \[AD Oriental Series No. 47. Dehli, 1977 (1893), p. 268.

3. Bosworth, C. E., The Islamic Dynasties. The University Press, Edinburgh, 1967, p.165.

4. Mitchiner, Michael, Oriental Coins and Their Values: The World of Islam. Hawkins Publications, London, 1975, p.276.

5. Beveridge, Annette S., trans., Babur-nana (Memoirs of Babur), vol. 1, Sange-Meel Publications, Lahore, 1975, p.191.

6. Woods, John E., The Aggoyunlu, Clan, Confederation, Empire. Bibliotheca Islamica. Minneapolis & Chicago, 1976, pp. 13-16. --- 10. 11. «4 13: 14.

## i, 16. 17. 18. 19, 20. vA F 22.

# TIMUR 771 - 807

TIMUR (736-807): From 771 in Transoxiana; 772-82 conquest of Khwarizm; 782-83 conquest of Khorasan; 784-86 conquest of Gurgan, Mazandaran, Sistan; 785 conquest of Qandahar; 788-89 conquest and 795-97 reconquest of Luristan, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Armenia, Jibal, Fars, Kirman; 795-97, 803-04, and 806-07 campaigns in Iraq 'Arabi; 801 campaign in northern India; 803-07 campaigns in Anatolia. Citing as his nominal Mongol overlords Suyurghatmish from 771-90 and Mahmid from 790-807 (although he died in 805); alone on local AE coins; and cited alone or as overlord on certain Isfendiyarid, Ottoman, Karamanid, and Germiyan issues 803-08.

The Dispensation of Timur: rivals of Shah Rukh 803 - 817

MUHAMMAD SULTAN B. J IHANGIR B. TIMUR (777-805): Cited as Wali 'Ahd 803-07 (although he died in 805) with Timur and Mahmud.

PIR MUHAMMAD B. JIHANGIR 8. TIMUR (778-809): 805-07 as Wali 'Ahd; 807-09 in Kabul, Qandahar, Balkh.

# QAIDU B. PIR MUHAMMAD B. JIHANGIR B. TIMUR: (c.799-821): 809-12 in Balkh.

MUHAMMAD JIHANGIR B. MUHAMMAD SULTAN B. JIHANGIR. B. TIMUR (799-836): Cited as "Khan" or nominal overlord on coins of Khalil Sultan b. Miranshah.

# KHALIL SULTAN B. MIRANSHAH B. TIMUR (784-814): 807-11 in Transoxiana.

MUHAMMAD 'UMAR B. MIRANSHAH B. TIMUR (c.785-809): c.808 in Mazandaran, Iraq.

ABU BAKR B. MIRANSHAH B. TIMUR (c.784-810): 808 and 809 in Azerbaijan; 808 campaign against Isfahan.

MIRANSHAH B. TIMUR (c.768-810): Cited as nominal overlord on coins of Abu Bakr b. Miranshah.

PIR MUHAMMAD B. 'UMAR SHAIKH B. TIMUR (c.781-812): 807-12 in Fars, as nominal vassal of Shah Rukh.

RUSTAM B. 'UMAR SHAIKH B. TIMUR (783-828): 807-12 in southern Jibal, as nominal vassal of Shah Rukh.

ISKANDAR B. 'UMAR SHAIKH B. TIMUR (786-818); 815-17 in Fars; 816-17 in Jibal, Mazandaran, as nominal vassal of Shah Rukh 815-16, independent thereafter.

# SHAH RUKH 807 - 850

SHAH RUKH B. TIMUR (779-850): From 807 in Khorasan; from 809 in Gurgan, Mazandaran; from 810 in Sistan; from 811 in Transoxiana; from 817 in Fars, Jibal; from 819 in Kirman; 823-24, 832-35, and 839-50 in Azerbaijan. The Dispensation of Shah Rukh 849 - 875

SULTAN MUHAMMAD B. BAISONGHUR B. SHAH RUKH (821-855): 849-50 rebel in eastern Jibal; from 851 in Fars, eastern Jibal; 853-55 in Khorasan, Mazandaran.

ABU'L-QASIM BABUR B. BAISONGHUR B. SHAH RUKH (827-861): From 851 in Khorasan, Gurgan, Mazandaran; 855-56 in Fars, eastern Jibal; 858 campaign in Transoxiana.

# 'ALA AL-DAULA B. BAISONGHUR B. SHAH RUKH (820-865): 851-53, 862-63 in Khorasan.

# ABU BAKR B. MUHAMMAD JUKI B. SHAH RUKH (831-852): 851-52 in Balkh.

ULUGH BEG B. SHAH RUKH (796-853): 851-53 in Transoxiana, Khorasan.

# 'ABD AL-LATIF B. ULUGH BEG B. SHAH RUKH (830-854): 853-54 in Transoxiana.

# SULTAN 'ABDALLAH B. IBRAHIM SULTAN 8. SHAH RUKH (836-855): 854-55 in Transoxiana.

# SHAH MAHMUD B. ABU'L-QASIM BABUR B. BAISONGHUR B. SHAH RUKH (852-863): 861-62 in Khorasan.

# SULTAN IBRAHIM B. 'ALA AL-DAULA B. BAISONGHUR B. SHAH RUKH (843-863): 861-63 in Khorasan.

# YADKAR MUHAMMAD B. SULTAN MUHAMMAD B. BAISONGHUR B. SHAH RUKH (855/6-875): 872-75 in Azerbaijan; 874-75 in Khorasan. --- 24. 25. 26. 28. 29. 30. 32.

# KF 34. 35. 36.

## كط 38. 40.

# SULTAN ABU 54:19 854 - 873

SULTAN ABU SA'ID B. SULTAN MUHAMMAD B. MIRANSHAH B. TIMUR (c.828-873): From 854 in Turkestan; from 855 in Transoxiana; 861, 863-73 in Khorasan; from 864 in Mazandaran; 872-73 in Fars, Jibal, Gilan.

The Dispensation of Sultan Abu Sa'id 873 - 932

SULTAN AHMED B. SULTAN ABU SA' ID (855-899): From 873 in Transoxiana.

SULTAN MAHMUD B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID (857-900): From 873 in Badakhshan; 899-900 in Transoxiana.

ULUGH BEG "KABULI" 8. SULTAN ABU SA'ID ) -907(: From 873 in Kabul, Qandahar.

'UMAR SHAIKH B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID (860-899): From 873 in Uzkand, Ferghana.

ABU BAKR B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID ) -884): Rebel against Ulugh Beg Kabuli in Kabul region and against Sultan Husain in Badakhshan.

SHAH RUKH B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID ) -897/8): 896-97 in Gilan (vassal of Mirza Kiya Ali, Husainid rebel against the Aq Qoyunlu Rustam).

# BAISONGHUR B. SULTAN MAHMUD B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID (882-905): 900-02 in Transoxiana; 903-05 in Hisar.

# SULTAN MAS'UD 8. SULTAN MAHMUD 8. SULTAN ABU SA'ID ) -906): From 901 in Transoxiana.

# SULTAN 'ALI B. SULTAN MAHMUD B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID ) -906): From 901 in Transoxiana.

SULTAN UWAIS ("KHAN MIRZA") 8. SULTAN MAHMUD 8. SULTAN ABU SA'ID ) -927(: From 913 in Badakhshan (vassal of Babur).

BABUR B. 'UMAR SHAIKH B. SULTAN ABU SA'ID (888-937): 899-903, 904-06 in Ferghana; 903, 906, 917-18 in Transoxiana; 910-12 and from 913 in Badakhshan; from 910 in Kabul, Ghazni; 913 and from 928 in Qandahar.

# SULTAN HUSAIN 863 - 911

SULTAN HUSAIN B. MANSOUR 8. BAIQARA 8. 'UMAR SHAIKH B. TIMUR (842-911): 863-64, 866-68 in Gurgan, Mazandaran; 873-74, 875-911 in Khorasan, Khwarizm, Badakhshan, Mazandaran, Sistan, northern Jibal. The Dispensation of Sultan Husain 902 - 922

MUHAMMAD HUSAIN B. SULTAN HUSAIN (\_ -907): 903-07 rebel in Astarabad.

MUHAMMAD MUHSIN ("KIBEK KHAN") 8. SULTAN HUSAIN (\_ -913): c.904 rebel; 911-13 in Meshed region.

# FARIDUN HUSAIN 8. SULTAN HUSAIN (\_ -915): 911-12 in Astarabad.

# IBN HUSAIN B. SULTAN HUSAIN ) -919): Rebel in Merv.

MUZAFAR HUSAIN B SULTAN HUSAIN (\_ -913/14): 911-13 in Khorasan as co-ruler with Badi al Zaman.

BADI' AL-ZAMAN B. SULTAN HUSAIN ) -923): 902-03 rebel in Balkh; 911-13 in Khorasan as co-ruler with Muzafar Husain, and possibly alone in 913.

# MUHAMMAD ZAMAN B. BADI' AL-ZAMAN B. SULTAN HUSAIN (902-946): 913-14(?) and c.919-22 in

Astarabad.