# ORTENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY INFORMATION SHEET

# INDIA ~ THE COINAGE OF MANIPUR > Jmte 074

# by N.G, RHODES

Manipur was a vetty hill state on the south-east of Assam and bordering Burma, It's area was 8,638 square miles and the population in 1891 was about 221,000. The state consisted of an extensive valley in the heart of the difficult jungle and mountain country which stretches between Assam, Kachar, Burma and Chittagong. The only town of any size was the capital of Imphal, sited in the centre of the state. Communications with India and Burma were formerly very difficult and hazardous and

the external trade of the state was restricted. European travellers to Manipur were infrequent in former times but from 1942 wntil 1945 125181 and the surrounding area became the major base for operations against the Japanese in Upper Burma.

# \\ BHUTAN / UTAN \\ - - حاملا رح ل‎ \|

# BEWAR

# - - o> Bcormaputra Qivee GARGHAON 5م‎ \|

| 5 | ١5 |
|:--- | ---: |
| ey aanYo wi |  |
| NY 0 uf |  |
| 74اكه |  |
| املاح‎ ond |  |
| = |  |
| ' |  |
|: | ١0 |

# كه‎ همع عرمعئ‎ ics ii

## Historical Background (1)

The early history of Nanivur is obscure, since written records more then 200

The traditions which do exist years old are virtvally non-existant in that area.

tell of frequent invasions from all sides, and the features of the ixhabitants, which are part-mongoloid, part Indo-Aryan, testify to this,

The first noteworthy event recorded is that about 1714 (or 1709?) a Naga named Panheiba became ruler of Maniour, adopted the Hindyv religion and took the name Gharib Niwaz. This ruler was successful in the frequent wars with Burma, although he did not make any permanent conquests,
## Historical Background (Continued)

Gharib Niwaz was murdered, along with his eldest son in about 1750 and the rule passed first to his eldest surviving son Ajit Shah and then in 1756 to a younger son Bharat Shah. The earliest dated coins of!anipur were struck during this year of 1756, but in the name of Gaura Shah. It seems likely that Bharat Shah only ruled as Regent for Gaura Shah, the grandson of the murdered Gharib Niwaz, and although a cripple, the rishtful heir, The coins of 1756 were vrobably

struck on the occasion of the coronation as they record the exact d-v of this event.

Bharat Shah died in 1758, and Gaura Shah agreed to share his power with his brother Jai Singh, a much stronger individual. Soon after 1750, the Burmese, taking advantage of the deat of Gharib Niwaz, had besun a series of invasions, By 1761 there was a grave danger thet! anipur would fall to the Burmese and Jai.

Singh apnealed to the Sritish for help, This was granted, and in 1762 British soldiers helped the -anipuris to repulse the Burmese, and a treaty of alliance was 51660.

It is interesting to note that at this time the British were told that as the Burmese had destroyed the greater vart of Maninur, it wes not 205883516 to meet the expenses incurred by the British Government in sending troops. As a token of sincerity "500 meklee gold rupees, valued at twelve silver rupees each" were offered. The gold coins numbered 2, 3 and 4 below, which are dated 1762, must have been struck on this occasion,

Gaura Sheh died in 1764, and from then until 1798 laninur was heepically ruled by Jai Singh, Invasions from Burma continued during the early part of his reign, and on at least three occasions he was driven from his country, but he

always managed to return without having to call on the British for help. His only known dated coin was struck in 1772, and it is vrob-ble that he was not able to hold his formal coronation before that date. By the last ten vears of his reign his position was secure, an? he was able to send military help to his neighbour in Assam, Gaurinatha Singh, when the latter hed internal troubles.

Jai Singh abdicated in 1798, and died the following year. The next 35 years was to see five of his eight sons on th: throne, Chaurajit Singh, the third of these brothers to become ruler, being the only one to continue the silver coinage begun by his uncle,

In 1812 Marajit Singh, a younger brother of Chaurajit, obtained the help of the Burmese and overthrew his elder brother. Initially he ruled as a vassal of the Burmese, but pradually he tried to act more and more 31236562162113. In 1819 he struck a fine gold coin but in the same year the Burmese finally lost patience with him and threw him out to join his brothers in Kachar,

This Burmese invasion did not stop at 1 anipur, an? very quickly they menaged to conquer the whole of Assam, bringing to an end the ancient Kingdom of the Ahoms. When the danger to British vossessions in India became avparent, the British prepared to attack the Burmese, and in 1824 war was declared. Soon after, Gambhir Singh, the youngest of the brothers, asked the British for money and arms to help him recapture kanipyr. This was readily rranted end in 1226 Gambhir Singh, who had helped sirnificantly in the defeat of the Burmese, was recognized as Raja of Lanipur,

Gambhir Singh's rule continued 562661511117 until his death in 1834 leaving a son, Chandra Kirti, who was barely two veers old, Nar Singh, a great grandson of Gharib Niwaz was 355012560 Segent. Chandra \_irti rvled vominally until 1544 when there was an unsuccessul attempt on "lar Singh's life. The Queen i.other was im\>licated and fled to Kachar with her son, and Nar Singh was made Raja.
## Historical Background (Continued)

He was succeeded at his death in 1850 by his brother Debendra Singh, whose reign

lasted only three months before Chandra Kirti, now 18 years old, took advantage of Debendra's unpopularity and recaptured his throne early in 1851. In spite of numerous attempts to overthrow him, Chandra Kirti managed to retain power until his death in 1886. He was succeeded by his son Sura Chandra, but in 1890 his brothers Kula Chandra and Tikendrajit Singh ousted him and Kula Chandra was made Raja.

The position inside Manipur rapidly deteriorated, and a full scale offensive was launched after several British Officials had been killed. Resistance was not strong and in iiarch 1891 Tikendrajit was tried and later executed and Kula Chandra was denorted for life. In September 1891 the Governor selected Chura Chandra Singh a descendent of Nar Singh to be Raja of Nanipur, but the administration was now in British 118205 and never again was Manipur allowed to strike coins. Descendants of Gharib Niwaz

# GHARIB NIWVAZ هم‎ 1714-1750 i ist Queen end.ueen

# f

T T T T SHYA!' SHAH AJIT SHAH UGAT NUN TONG SARBOSACHE BHARAT SHAH - 1750  1750-56 SHAH SEAH SHAH 1756-58

# 

es \| GAURA 51 JAI SINGH (or GAIA SHAH) (or BEAGYA CHANDRA) 1758-64 (or RAJA KARTA ) 1764-98

# f

T T T \| ية‎ SANAHAL LABANYA MADHU TULSIJIT CHAURAJIT MARJIT GHAMBIR CHANDRA CHANDRA SINGH SINGH $$ 1798=1 801 $$ 1801-6 1803-12 1812-19 1826-34 \|

# CHANDRA kKIRTI

## 1854-44 155 9

# ' SURA KULA PIKeNORATIT

# CHANDRA CHANDRA p 1886-90 1890-1 Rulers of Manipur

Gharib Niwaz 1714-1750 Huidromba Subol 1219-0 Ajit Shah 1750-6 Gambhir singh 1820-1 821 ist reign Bharat Shah 1756-1758 Jadu Singh 1822-1 823 Gaura Singh 1752-14 Rachab Singh 1525-1 Jai Singh 1764-1798 Bhadra Singh 1824-1825 Labanya Chandra 1798-1801 Gambhir Singh 1 825-1833 2nd reign liadhu Chandra 1801-1806 Chandra Kirti Singh 1833-1947 ist reign Chaurajit Singh 1803-1812 Nar Singh 1843-1849 Marjit Singh 1212-9 Chandra Kirti Sinch 1849-18€6 2nd reien Sura Chandra Singh 1886-1 890 Kula 'handra Singh 1890-1 294 Chura Chandra Singh 12891-1940 --- Coinage

The coinage of laninur has received scent attention up to now, probably because very few examples of the son-re silver ans gold coins struck prior to

1812 have survived in Yestern collections, د‎ (2) published a few of the coins of Gaura Singh and Jai Sigh and Thorburn published one runee of Chaurajit Singh (3), but I know of no other records of these coins. The squxre coin of Gambhir Sinzh wos published by 5.2. Basmin 3251 for 1965, The reason for the scarcity of these coins is that thev were usually only struck in small qvantities for ceremonial use, Chaurajit Singh was the only ruler who seems to hove made a real atternt to introduce silver coins into the currency, but most 07 his coins were carried away and melted by the Burmese during their oceunation around 1820,

The only coins struck in any 'uantitv in Manipur were the small bell-metal "sel",(4) The exact date of the introduction of these coins is not certain, but was probably Ccvring the second half of the eighteenth century, he coins were nonular because they were svitable for the small vurevases made by the inhabitants and they were not valuable enoucsh for it to be -vrorth-while for the Burmese to steal then. Botham listed a number of these coins in his Catalorue of the Shillone Cabinet (5), but I find it almost imrossible to tie un the coins listed by hin with

those that I have seen. Bothan lists coins with the initial letters of practically all the rulers of 'lanipur from Jai Singh (alias Bhagya Chandra) to Kula Chandra, but omits the letter "Sri", which is by far the commonest of the letters found on the sels, It seems certain from the dozens of coins which I have seen that the letters on the sels do not, in the main, corresvond with the initial letters of the rvlers' names, and this is confirmed by documents published by 1 ajor Pridmore (6). Here it is made clear that an avspicious letter was chosen at the start of each reisn with no logic apparent hehind the choice, although "Sri" and "Ma" were chosen 15

frequently. in my listing below 1 give the letters an\* varieties known 50 me, with an attribution wherever possible, Cther varieties may vell exist, slthough I feel that Botham may have used his imagination on badly struck snecimens in arrivins at some of his readiness.

In 1858 and 103° the Calcutta mint struck a numb r of sels to be used for nayaent of labour for building a new road from Manipur to Kachar. These coins were apparently better made then those struck. in: anipur itself and had the letter "a" on ther. The background to this event is very fully covered by l'ajor "ricnore, but as neither he nor I have ever seen "''a' coins thet iook any better nroduced than

## the other sels, I can sive no clear -uide for recornising these Calcutta stritines(7).

These little sels continued to he struck  ١ « large numbers until 1891, wher the British finally took over tie sdministration of the State. Throurhout the i%th century silver coins from India and Burma also circulated, but were valued 2020 032 to their metal content. The rate of exchange wit' tre sels fluctuated with the price of silver; before 1&3: a rupnee was worth abort 900 sel, but during that veer the velue dropped suddenly owing to a la-ge influx of silver fron India, From 1557 onwards the ruvee exchanged for bctween 400 and 420 sels. Conner never circulated until after 1891, and one ottempt by the British to introduce covper coins into the evurrency during the 1360's failed completel:. After 1891 the British 17505604 Indian currency onto the inhabitants, snd the sels gracivelly disanv earad Tron circulation,

Notes:= 1.  Hy historical sumrary is telsen mainly from 4, Roy's "History of hanipur", Calcutta 195°, 2.  iunismata Orisrtalia", London 14:25,

5+ $$ =  ٠5 ى‎ $$ wt. ؟‎ ere هم عر‎ ١ 38 "Notes 7 Yew Rere Indien Coins" JASB NS..XLII (1920),

4, 4n assay maie in Calcutta int in 1°5& showed the metal content to be conrer 73.6. Tin 23,2 and Jine 3,2 -/ @ --- Hotes (Continued)

5.  "Catalosue of the Provincial Coin Cabinet Assam", Allahabad 1930,

6.  "The East India Comnany's "ell \| etal Coinage for anipur 1235", Much of my information on the sels is tak from this very intsresting «erticle.

## (Sead 's Bulletin Dec, 1972).

7.  'The Coin illustrated by Major -ridcmore is 5# badly struck "Sri coin turned sideways. Catalorue of Coins Gaura Shah (or Gavre 3imha) 1756-64

1.  Gold Ruvee. $$ Dated 1678 (=1756 A.D.) $$ Wt. 12.8 ens.

Obv. "Jesri Gaurasyah Vaninvreswarac..ceesvecvee" Rev. "Vaisakh Sudhi.........e6. Samvet 1675"

| 2, | Gold rupee, | Dated 1654 (=1762 A.D.) | Tt, 11,6 ms, |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Obv. | "Jesri Gavra Simha Wanipuresvaraceccccccscceeee 5806537 | Rev. | "Asara Sudhi.....ccsceeees 13 Samvat 1604" |
| 3, | Gold + wee. | Dated 1654 (=1762 A.D.) | Wt. 5.8 ms. |

Obv. "Jesri Gavra Simha Wanipuresvaraceccccccscceeee 5806537 Rev. "Asara Sudhi.....ccsceeees 13 Samvat 1604"

3, Gold + wee. $$ Dated 1654 (=1762 A.D.) $$ Wt. 5.8 ms.

Obv. "Jesri Gaura jimha "aninuresve ra" Rev. "Asara Sudhi..ccecccccecvcee 13 cam 1654" - - Gold + Rupee.  Undated, but struck in 1762 A.D. Wt. 2.9 gms,

Obv. "Jesri Gaure Sinha" Rev. ":.anipuresvara"

5.  Silver Rupee. $$ Dated 1676 (=1756 A.D.) $$ Wt. 12.7 ens.

Cov. "Jesri Gaura Shah Lanipuresvara..cocescvee" Rev. "Vaisakh Sudiisssssyevcees SamvVat 1678" Uncertain i&th century Wt. 11.5 gms.

6.  Silver 201566. Barabarous inscription on both sides, Jai Singh 1764-1798

7.  Gold iupee. $$ Dated 1594 (=1772 A.D.) $$ dt. 11.6 ems.

Obv. "vaya Simha Uripavarasye Sake 1694" Rev. "SriSri Govindapade Suman lladhurkarasya" 8, Silver + Rupee. Undated It. 5.9 gms.

Obv. "Sri Jaya Simhasya" Reve "Sri Govinda Deva" Chaurajit Singh 1303-1312

9.  Silver Rupee $$ Dated 1728 (=1006 A.D.) $$ Wt. 11.4 ems.

Obv. "i anipuresvara iri Sri Chavrajit Simha Nripavarasya Saka 1728" Rev. "Srila Sri Radha Govinda Charana Ravinda Nugal Sevakasya" / 10, Silver Rupee, Date? 1734 (=1812 A.D.) Also known for Wts.1i1.1 ل‎ 1729 and 1732 11.4 gems.

Obv. "Srinanmanivuresvara Srm Chaurajit Simha Nripavarasya Saka 1734" Rev. "Sri Madradha Govindapada Ravinda lakaram Damano: adhu Karasya"
## Catalogue of Coins (Continued) Chaurajit Singh 41.  Silver + Rupee. Dated 1726 (=1804 A.D.)

Obv. "Sri Chaurajit Simha Nripasya Saka 1726" Rev. "Sri Sri Radha Govinda Pada Sevaka"

12.  Silver + Rupee $$ Dated 1726 (=1804 A.D.) $$ Wt. 2.7 gms.

Obv. "Sri Chaurajit Simhasya Saka 1726" Rev. "Sri Radha Govinda Pada Sevakasya"

13, Silver + Rupee. Dated 1729 (+ 1807 A.D.) Wt. 3.0 gms.

Obv. "Sri Cheurajit Simhas Nripasya Saka 1729" Rev. "Sri Radha Govin Pada lian Madhu Kara" Marjit Singh 1812 - 1819.

14.  Gold Rupee. $$ Dated 1741 (=1819 A.D.) $$ Wt. 11.6 gms, Z. 00 أب‎ $$ = $$ $$ = $$ s\* J ve s Obv. ""Srinennanipuresvara Sri barjit Sinha Nripavarasya" Rev. As obverse, but Saka 1741 on last line. Gambhir Singh 1826 ~ 1534,

15.  Gold Rupee. Dated 1043 Chandrabdah (i.c. Lunar year) =.(؟‎ Levend in Bangali. Wt. 11.4 ems. / Obv. "Sri Gambir Simha Nripavarasya Chandrabdah 1043" Rev. "Sri Radha Govinda Charan Sevakasya" Anonymous Bell-metal 5

## All coins have a plain reverse.

YVeights vary widely from 0.4 to 1.5 gms, with a nean of about 0.7 ems.

16.  Sel. sri" In fine stvle, Lete 18th cent. to © 1390,

17.  P to Sel. عدي‎ In a variety of stvles, 1105 517 after 1826, 22.

23.  Sel. "Ha" This letter was being used in 1836 during the ist reign

of Chandra Kirti, and may have been used earlier. Presumably this letter was chosen as it is the intial letter of "Manipur", rather than the initial letter of Marajit Singh.

24.  Sel, "Ra?" Both these pieces may have a crude version of the Bengali to letter "ra", said by Temple (IA 189°) to have been used 25.  by Nara Singh (1834-50).

26.  Sel. "Ka" I do not 'mow which ruler 1551160 this type, but from the worn state of the very few examples I have seen, I think that it was probably struck before 120,

27.  Sel. "a" The specimens I have seen with this letter all show very

little sign of wear. I think that it was struck late in the series, rerhans by Sura Chandra (1886-90). Certainly this type was not struck by Labanya Chandra as stated by Bo tham e

28. - 5616.  "Ku" The coins I have seen with this Benrali letter are alo in perfect condition, and I assume that this ccin was struck by Kula Chandra (1890-1). This is the only example of the initial letter of the Raja's name being chosen, --- Ta \| CAG TF 3 الاعام سم‎ Ay tat: AUTeN bon: Ss

---s دا‎ FE\} rota! 6.  aye RoUR! عم‎ \|\\dhleda ie asta اله‎ \|1113 SAY\] aver; الخد‎ HIBLY ne \| le "WRG

HAYA) م‎ afer alate\] Neate 5 aa ut fe a SAU \| \|؟11:!كاماملا‎ = SR ® ferred ot

هاجرل 1080\| مل عل لا ‎, CARS