# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY - - March 1984

# INFORMATION SHEET NO 26

# THE GOLD AND SILVER COINAGE OF THE SIKHS

# PART IV: MISCELLANEOUS MINTS

# K.W.WIGGINS & S.GORON

The principal mints of the Sikhs and the coins that were struck at them have been discussed in previews Information Sheets (Nos. 22, 23 and 24). In this paper it is proposed to deal with a number of other sites which were within the Sikh domain and at which silver rupees were struck or alleged to have been struck. Some ef these minting places and their products are very well known and have been published in netable catalogues from time to time. Others are virtually unknown and the attributions often subject to considerable dewbt. In some cases only one er two specimens are recorded, usually with incomplete legends.

The mints dealt with in this paper are: Amandgarh, Derajat (Dera Ismail Khan), Dera (Dera Ghazi Khan), Jhang, Leiah, Mukerian, Muzang Acchra, Nimak (Pind Dadan Khan) and Peshawar.

The credit' for initially attributing these coins must go te Charles Rodgers who first published many Sikh coins in his paper (1). After this paper was published Redgers apparently found many mere ceins including a few very rare ones from hitherte unknown mints. Unfertunately, he did not publish these coins very satisfactorily but included them in various catalogues that he compiled. None of these rare coins were phetographed er even drawn, so they have lain, largely unnoticed in museums for upwards ef ene hundred years. The authors have been able to ebtain photographs of some ef the more unusual coins mentioned by Redgers and which have formed part ef the Lahore Museum cellection. Our thanks in this respect are extended to Mrs.Tahira Azam Beg for kindly making the phetographs available.

# CATALOGUE

# ANANDGARH.

Anandgarh was the fort situated in the town of Anandpur (31-14'N. 76-31'E.) in the Hoshiapur district of the Punjab, on the left bank of the Sutlej river. Anandpur is said te have been founded by Tegh Bahadur, the ninth Guru (AD 1664-75). Tegh Bahadurs' right to succeed Hari Krishen as Guru was contended by several other

claimants, at least one ef whem sought to assassinate him. To escape them he bought a hilleck near the village of Makhawal (5 miles north of Kiratpur), and built himself a village which he optimistically named Anandpur (haven 02 rest). Govind Singh, Tegh Bahadur's son, fortified the centre of Anandpur and the neighbouring land with a

series eof forts: Anandgarh, Keshgarh, Lohgarh and Fatehgarh. Anandpur became Govind Singh's stronghold but he suffered a defeat there by the troops cr tke Mughel emperor Aurangzeb. The town was later the headquarters of a branch of the Sedhis; descendents of Ram Das (the fourth Guru), and the centre of the Nihang sect of Sikhs.\* In the 19th century the town was the location for a yreat annual religious fair. \* See footnote on page 2.
Coins were struck at Anandgarh, presumably in 'he fort itself, for about a decade in the late 18th century, probably at the instance of a local Sardar. The authors have been unable to trace any significant activity taking place at Anandpur during this period.

Type I. Ar rupee. Weight: 10.5 - 11.1 grams. Diameters 22 - 23 mn.

# Ob. LS 5p ازنا‎ ee

# Rev. SoS")

## IN CCT" "Ine وس‎ © apne pola

Translation and Ob. Deg, tezgh wa fath wa~ nasrat bederang yafat transliteration az Nanak Guru Gobind Singh = Abundance, the sword, victery and help without delay Guru Govind Singh obtained from Nanak.

Rev. Zarb Anandgarh, sambat (date) jalus maimanat manus = Struck at Anandgarh \_in Samvat..... the year of prosperous accession.

Known dates: S.1840. S.1841. 83.1842. S.1843. 5.1844. S.1845. 5.1846. S.1849.

Rupees only are known of this mint. It is likely that they were also struck in the years S.1847 and S.1848, but coins with these dates have net been observed. Generally they are well struck coins but specimens that have been struck from very worn reverse dies have been noted. The use of worn dies has also been neted with the rupees of Ranjit Dee of Jammu and with seme of the rupees of Amritsar dated in the years 3. -1359. (Type III).

A number of symbols are found on the Anandgarh coins. They eccur mainly on the reverse side; for example on the rupee of S.1842 may be found a flower to the left of the date, above this is a trisul and below a spear-like weapon.

Rodgers remarks that the rupee dated 35.1841 has the word ahad (first) at the bottom of the reverse, indicating the first year of a new government or era. A coin dated S.1849 has the year 9. This series of years is also found on the Type III rupees of Amritsar (see I.S. No.22). As this latter type was struck intermittently during the

same years that the main series of Amritsar coins was struck, there may be some common link between the two types. An Anandgarh rupee dated 3.1342 has a partial Hegira date (121\*) above tne top line on the ebverse but such dates are invariably off tre flan en nearly all specimens examined.

Rupees ef Anandgarh are rare. Not all the coins bearing the dates given abowehave been available for examination. Redgers remarks on the spelling of the mint name, which appears as SiS aX on some coins, but which may merely be a stylistic quirk.

\* Nihangs were originally suicide squads of the Mughal army with a distinctive blue uniform. The name and uniform were appropriated by the Sikhs and given to a sect said to have been founded by one of the elder sons of Guru Gevind Singh. The Nihangs were also known as Akalis.
# DERAJ AT.

The Derajat is the alluvial plain between the Sulaiman Range and the Indus river; the region takes its name from the three Deras or settlements of Dera Ghazi Khan in the Lower Derajat and of Dera Ismail Khan and Dera Fath Khan in the Upper Derajat. All three settlements were founded toward the end of the 15th century by various Baluch

chiefs. They appear not to have been places of any great importance during Mughal times and only came into prominence after the invasion of India by Nadir Shah in AD 1738-39.

vie are not concerned, in this paper, with Dera Fath Khan which was the site of a mint that issued autonomous copper coins and possibly silver coins of Nadir Shah. It was never,--as far as is kmown, a silver mint of the Sikhs. Dera Ghazi Khan was an important mint of the Durrani Shahs and is named Dera (% "\> ) on their coins. Both Dera Fath Khan and Dera Ghazi Khan fell to the Sikhs in AD 1820. Their issues from the latter mint are dealt with under a separate heading.

Derajat was the mint name given to Dera Ismail Khan. Coins were first struck there during the reign of the Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah (AD 1719-48) and continued during the time of his successor, Ahmad Shah Bahadur (AD 1748-54). All are rare. Nadir Shah had coins struck there near the end of his reign and minting was carried on under Ahmad Shah Durrani and successive Durrani rulers up to and including the second reign

of Mahmud Shah (AD 1809-18). Mahmud Shah Durrani was deposed by the Barakzais in 1818 but continued to rule in Herat until his death in AD 1829. Some years earlier, in 1793, Zaman Shah had conferred the government of the district upon Muhammad Khan, an Afghan

eof the Sadozai tribe. Muhammad and his successors, Hafiz Ahmad and Sher Muhammad, successfully governed the area until AD 1820 (AH 1236) when Ranjit Singh took the fortress of Mankera and had the whole area at his mercy. Sher Muhammad however was allowed to continue his rule in Dera Ismail Khan subject to the payment of tribute to the Sikhs.

Type I. Ar rupee. Weight: 10.8 grams. Diameter: 19.5 - 21 mn. Gio Rev. Descent cial

Translation and Ob. Sikka bar zar zad batufeeq Ilah, Khusru transliteration geety sitan Mahmud Shah = Struck coin on gold with the aid of God, the world conquering Cyrus, Mahmud Shah. Rev. Zarb Derajat, sanah (date) = Struck at Derajat in the year....

Known dates: AH1236, AH1237, AH1238, AH1240, AH1241, AH1242, AH1244, aH1245,

As previously mentioned, Mahmud Shah Durrani, at the end of his second reign, was deposed by the Barakzais but continued to rule in Herat until his death. However, in Dera Ismail Konan, after his deposition and his death coins continued to be struck in his

name by the ruling Nawabs. The de facto control of the area by the Sikhs after AD 1820 did not result in any change being made in the coinage and after AH 1245 (AD 1829) the rupees bearing Mahmud's name are posthumous issues struck by the local chiefs as tributaries of the Sikhs. Whitehead (2) lists this type of coin until AH 1251 as Durrani and maxes no comment on their continued issue when Derajat was under Sikh

control. Although the legends remain the same on all these coins, there are a number of die varieties mainly involving the placement of the figures of the date. There are a number of different symbols to be found on both sides, none of which seem to have any

connotation wit the Sikhs. Gold and fractional silver coins of this type are unknown.
Type Il. Ar rupee. Weight: 10.8 - 10.9 grams. Diameter: 17-18 mn.

# 3 HSC Ob. Rev. -- جا‎ \* fF? Ana Proud

Translation and Ob. Such a small part of the whole legend transliteration appears on these coins that it is 'impossible to say with certainty what

## it is. Rev. Zarb Derajat (date) = Struck at Derajat.ه...٠‎

Known dates: 3.1892. 85.1893. 85.1894. S.1895. 5.1896. 5.1897. 85.1899. S.1900. 5.1901. 2

On formally annexing Derajat in AD 1835-36 the Sikh authorities decided to institute their type of coinage at the Derajat mint, thereby replacing those struck in the name of Mahmud Shah. These rupees, the first of which is dated Samvat 1892 (AD 1835), are of inferior manufacture on small thick flans. Therefore only a portion of the whole legends are visible. Although the first few issues are from reasonably engraved dies, the remainder are of poor workmanship with large, ill~formed letters. It has therefore been found impossible to compose the obverse legend correctly or to render a complete translation but no doubt it is one of the usual couplets found on the coins of the major mints. From what can be seen, it may be the same as the obverse legend of the Type II Multan rupees. The centre of the obverse contains a character in Gurmukhi or Nagari, which seems to differ with the passage of time; it is however, so badly formed that the authors have not been able to identify it.

Fractional silver coins are unknown and so are gold coins. The copper coins of Derajat, of which there are a considerable number of types, have been competently catalogued by Valentine (3). Ar rupee. S.1899. Ar rupee. S.1900.

The above coin dated 5.1900 bears this date on both

obverse and reverse. It is possible that the same applies for other dates, but most of the small number of coins of this type which have been examined have been struck in such a way that the area above the «~~ of Derajat is off the coin.
# eae DERA (Dera Ghazi Khan).

Dera Ghazi Khan was founded in the laté 15th century by a Mahrani chief, Ghazi Khan, who occupied the surrounding area of the South Derajat. The new rulers at first held their territory as vassals of the Multam government but in the third generation they found themselves strong enough to throw off the yoke and proclaim their independence of the Lodis. Eighteen princes of the same family held successively the Lower Derajat and were named alternately Hajji and Ghazi Khan. When Akbar conquered most of northern India they made nominal submission but were virtually independent. In 1739 the country west of the Indus came into the hands of Nadir Shah but in 1758 the area was overrun by the Kalhoras of Sind. By 1770 Ahmad Shah Durrani had established his authority there. With the final retreat of the Afghans from the Punjab the Sikhs were able in 1819 to annex the Derajat, although the southern part was held as a fief by the Nawab of Bahawalpur, who in 1827 seized the whole district of the Derajat. By 1830 he had been expulsed by General Ventura, one of Ranjit Singh's leading commanders. Sawan Mal of Multan was then installed as Governor and was later succeeded by his son, Mulraj.

Dera Ghazi Khan was the site of a Mughal mint during the reigns of Ahmad Shah Bahadur and Alamgir II. The mint name on these rare coins is Dera. Nadir Shah, during his incursion into India in 1738-39 did not then or thereafter in his reign apparently strike any coins at Dera but those of Ahmad Shah Durrani commence in the first year of his reign and Dera became an important mint of the Durrani Empire. Gold, silver and copper coins were struck there by successive Durrani Shahs until the fifth year of Shuja al Mulk Shah (AD 1803-09). In 1819-20 the Sikhs occupied Dera and, according to Rodgers, struck rupees there.

Type -  Ar rupee. Weight: 11.025 grams. Diameter: 23 m.

Ob. Insufficient appears on the coin to enable a complete reading but it is probably as Type V, Amritsar mint. Br; Rev. Fe, وو‎

# Sle جلرس‎

Translation and Ob. See Type V, Amritsar mint. ai wae sarees Rev. Zarb Dera, takht Akal bakht,

jalus maimanat manus = Struck at. Dera in the reign of tranquil prosperity, 1884, by the grace of the throne of God. Known dates: S.1884/1904?

This rupee was catalogued by Rodgers as No.119 in the Catalogue of the Coins in the Government Museum, Lahore (Calcutta, 1891), in which he states that on the obverse

is the date 5.1904 and the word74 (Ram). From the rubbing obtained these are not obvious. The date S.1884 below the mint name Dera is clear on the reverse. The authors have not come across another specimen of 5218 coin type with a clear mint name, but readers are referred to the coin listed under Leiah (page 7) which bears a striking resemblance to the above rubbing and which, in the authors' opinion should be ascribed to Dera.
# JHANG.

The town of Jhang is situated at 31-18'N. 72-20'E. near the junction of the Jhelum and Chenab rivers. the Sial chieftan, Mal Khan.

It is said to have been founded in the 15th century by

The town was later destroyed by flood but was restored during the reign of Aurangzeb (AD 1658-1707). Jhang does not appear at all in the subsequent history of the Punjab but it was embraced in the Durrani empire after the conquest of north-west India by Ahmad Shah Abdali in the 18th century. appear to have become a centre of any importance. were taken by Ranjit Singh in AD 1805.

Jhang was never a mint of the Mughals or the Durranis.

It does not The town and the surrounding district

Two Sikh coins have been attributed to a mint at Jhang; one was recorded in the White King sale that took place in Amsterdam in 1905 (4). abouts is unknown.

There is no photograph of this coin and its present where- The second specimen is in the Lahore Museum and is presumably the coin recorded by Rodgers in his catalogue (5). Type I. Ar rupee. Ob. Plate I. Rev. Translation and Ob. transliteration Rev. Known dates: 5.1873 (White King sale).

Weight: 11.08 grams (171 grns). Diameter: 22.86 mn.

Complete reading not obtained but appears identical to that on Type ae rupees of the Amritsar mint. i, ioe.

# yy re ae SS Complete reading not obtained.

# Wey ay 4 pinto See Type II, Amritsar mint.

Complete reading not obtained but possibly Zarb Sri Dar Jhang 1874 jalus maimanat manus, takht Akal bakht = Struck at the illustrious place of Jhang in the reign of tranquil prosperity 1874 by the grace of the throne of God. S.1874 (Lahore Museum).

## Rodgers, in his catalogue, somewhat ambiguously records against this coin

is alr tepd 1874S." He then remarks, "In the lam (,J) of Akal is (OD) در حم‎

= Dar Jhang? بود‎ The word referred to could be as well be something else.

(meaning place). appears to be of cruder workmanship.

This was sold to me as a Jhang rupee. Obviously Rodgers had his doubts as to whether this was a rupee of Jhang.

" انمجح‎ (= Jhang) but as it is incomplete it could The letters under this word do not look like Although similar to the contemporary rupees of Amritsar, this coin In the top line, to the right of the date, is It hasd/' on it as on Amritsar

# دار

certainly the word Sri and there is a small trident to the right of the pipal leaf. There is no mark in this position on any of the Amritsar rupees. Nevertheless, onewould normally expect to find the mint name in a fairly prominent position, probably

close to the word Sri, rather than engraved periphally within the letters of another word. The attribution of the above coins must remain very doubtful until such time as additional and better specimens are found.
# LETAH.

The town of Leiah is situated 60 miles north-west of Multan on the right bank of the river Indus at 30-58'N. 70-58'E. It was founded about AD 1550 by Kamal Khan a Mirani Baluch, but in 1670 was taken by the Jaskari Baluchs who held it until 1787. It came under the Durranis during the reign of Ahmad Shah and in 1787 a local governor was appointed by Taimur Shah Durrani. Three years later however it was included in the governorship of Muhammad Khan Sadozai, whose seat was at Mankera. The whole area was taken by the Sikhs in 1821 and Leiah became the centre of administration for the neighbouring tract. The town was occupied by the British in 1849.

The only indication that coins may have been struck at Leiah comes from Rodgers (6) who recorded one rupee with the remark, "This coin is said to have been struck at Leiah. The mint is not on it."

Type I. Ar rupee. Weight: 11.08 grams. Diameter: 23.1 mm. Ob. Complete و ع‎ not obtained

# Joie SBEE

## sae EE Rev.Complete reading not obtained ( » 2,

## Sd bp \>

Translation and Ob. Incomplete but probably as Type V, transliteration Amritsar mint. Rev. Incomplete.

Zarb....eejalus maimanat manus 1884 takht Akal bakht = Struck at.....?

in the reign of tranquil prosperity 1884 by the grace of the throne of God. Known dates: S.1884/1904.

A photograph of this coin is at Plate II. It will be seen that there is no evidence whatsoever on the coin itself to indicate that it was struck at Leiah. Moreover, a comparison of this photograph with the rubbing obtained of the coin struck

at Dera (page 5) show the two to be extremely similar. The photograph of the 'Leiah' coin bears part of the mint name only but what can be seen fits in well with the name Dera. Rodgers says of the Dera coin that it bears the date 5.1904 as well as the word 0A. This data is missing from the rubbing though there are what look like two squares below the word مير‎ on the obverse. The 'Leiah' coin bears the date 1904 and has Mo on the obverse. In the opinion of the authors, this 'Leiah' coin should be re-attributed to the mint of Dera.
# MUKERIAN.

A village of this name is in the Hoshiapur district of the Punjab and about 55 miles north-east of Amritsar at 31-57'N. 77-39'E. From about 1774-1784 it was the stronghold of a Sikh Sardar, Jai Singh Kanhaya. Ranjit Singh occupied Mukerian in 1811. The only other event of importance concerning this place is that Sher Singh, the reputed son of Ranjit Singh, is said to have been born there.

Following xodgers' remarks, rupees are alleged to have been struck at a place of this name about AD 1822-23.

Type I. Weight: 11.082 grams. Diameter: 24 mn. Ob. Complete reading not obtained

# fn ثور و رنبوك‎

Rev. Complete reading not obtained \_سري كال ly IAA: a لسولح‎ Translation and Ob.? Deg, tegh wa fath wa nasrat bederang transliteration yafat az Nanak Guru Gobind Singh = Abundance, the sword, victory and help without delay Guru Govind Singh obtained from Nanak. Rev.? Sri Akali Sambat (date) jalus (maimanat) manus Known dates: S.1879. S.1880.

Evidence that these rupees were struck at Mukerian is lacking. Rodgers published two. Of one he remarked, "This is said to be a Malkerian rupee. Year not certain." (6). In fact the last digit of the date is off the flan of the coin. He listed another (5) dated S.1879 and apparently guessed that the mint name at the top of the reverse was ما.با ن‎ whereas it is in fact رق يلاكأ‎ (Sri Akali). Another with the date S.1880 was published in the catalogue of the White King sale (4). There is no photograph. Only two specimens have been examined; those from the A.N.S. and B.M. collections. The A.N.S. specimen does not show a mint name but does show what appears to be "Sri Akali"" at the top of the reverse. The B.M. specimen, dated S.1879, shows fragments of what may be the mint name at the bottom of the reverse.

There has even been doubt as to exactly where in the Punjab this place is. Codrington (7) says it is near Multan and gives the mint name as WL pS ما‎ Rodgers does not mention the place in his paper (1) but in his catalogue gives the name as Malkerian and states it is near Multan. On a large scale map of the Punjab of 1891 the name of the place described above is given as Mukerian and no other place of a similar name can be found in the Punjab.
# MUZANG ACCHRA.

Muzang, at one time, was a village just outside the city of Lahore. It is now the name of an inner suburb. Acchra was a zila of the Lahore tahsil. The name Muzang Acchra indicates that the village of Muzang was in the Acchra district.

The coin described below is another of Rodgers' discoveries and as far as is known is unique.

Type I. Ar rupee. Weight: 11.18 grams. Diameter: 24.1 mn. Ob. Complete reading not obtained

# NSE Si ره‎ yee? صر‎ Plate III. Rev. "TAAa ee"

# ما فوسل‎ all عارك‎

Translation and Ob. Incomplete. Probabiy as Type II, transliteration Lahore mint. Rev. Zarb Muzang Acchra, sambat 1389,

jalus maimanat manus = Struck at Muzang Acchra in Samvat 13889, the year of prosperous accession. Known dates: S.1889.

Rodgers ascribed this coin to Muzang Acchra and gives the mint name as From the photograph of the coin however, this reading is not entirely satisfactory

although it is difficult to suggest an alternative. Rodgers may have had more conclusive information to justify his attribution. There appears to be something, either letter or ornament, before the م‎, and there is no sign on the coin of an alif before \> which should be written as جما رك‎ \|. This coin closely resembles the contemporary rupees of Lahore and it would be interesting to know whether a subsidery mint ever existed at Muzang Acchra and if so, for how long. --- NIMAK (Pind Dddan Khan).

Some Sikh rupees allegedly bear the word Nimak as the name of the minting place.

No such place will be found in the Punjab. In Persian and Urdu the word nimak means salt. The name is said to have been put on rupees struck at Pind Dadan Khan (32-35'N. 72-58'.), a town on the right bank of the Jhelum river which was noted as the main emporium for salt, mined in the hills behind the town.

Type I. Ar rupee. Weight: 11.14 grams. Diameter: 23.5 mm.

# Ob. Complete se OF i not obtained تكو ركو سوك

# Complete reading not obtained سا‎ 11-0 1 Sl, وس‎ Loe

Translation and Incomplete but probably identical transliteration with Type V, Amritsar mint. Incomplete but possibly Nimak sahi

jalus maimanat manus takht Akal bakht Known dates: 5.1904. 5.1905.

Ar rupee. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diameter: 23 mm.

## As Type I but in centre 1141 A\\ 3 As Type I. Known dates: S.1905.

The attribution of these rupees to Pind Dadan Khan rests entirely with Rodgers who presumably must have been in possession of some information regarding them. It is unfortunate that none of the few specimens examined show clearly the commencement of the word in the top line of the reverse. This word (Nimak?) is followed by another which is possibly sahi. The complete line would thus read "Nimak sahi" ( سا وى‎ - meaning salt money.  What is clear is that the line across the top third of the reverse is not the elongated ~ of "zarb" so there is not on these coins an accepted mint name preceded by the word "zarb." No information concerning the issue of these coins has been discovered and the question of why they were struck for a very limited period at Pind Dadan Khan is a matter of conjecture. It is possible that they were issued locally in some connection with the salt trade. The rupees are quite rare and no fractional denominations have come to light.
# PESHAWAR.

The ancient frontier city of Peshawar was incorporated into the Mughal empire during the reign of Akbar (AD 155601605). Sometime later, possibly during the reign of Shah Jahan (AD 1628-58), it became a Mughal mint town where coins in three metals were struck, albeit very spasmodically, until the twentyfirst year of the reign of Muhammad Shah (AD 1719-48), when the city fell to Nadir Shah, the Persian invader

of India. The city was never again under the Mughals. With the death of Nadir Shah, Peshawar became an important centre of the Durranis and the winter headquarters of the Durrani Shahs. All the Durrani rulers, from the time of Ahmad Shah, struck coins at Peshawar; the last issue being in the twelfth year of the reign of Aiyyub Shah or about AH 1246-47 (AD 1830-31).

The Sikhs under Ranjit Singh first assailed and took Peshawar in 1818 but their occupation was only temporary. The city was soon retaken by the Durranis. In 1823 the Sikhs again captured the city but were unable to retain it. Their third assault ten years later was successful and on taking the city were able to annexe it. Peshawar was held by the Sikhs against continuous Afghan opposition until the fall of their empire in 1849.

The Sikhs issued a series of rupees over a short period in Peshawar. All are of the same type.

Type I. Ar rupee. Weight: 8.47 - 8.55 grams. Diameter: 23 - 24 mn.

# Ob. wk om, Le CL foe HS نا كورو‎

## Rev. 23 Lous,

Translation and Ob. Deg, tegh wa fath wa nasrat bederang transliteration yafat az Nanak: Guru Gobind Singh = Abundance, the sword, victory and help without delay Guru Govind Singh obtained from Nanak.

Rev. Zarb Peshawar, sanah jalus (date) = Struck in Peshawar in the year of accession....

Known dates: 5S.1891. 5.1892. S.1593. S.15894.

In 1834 Ranjit Singh appointed Hari Singh Nalwa as governor of Peshawar province. Hari Singh's tenure of office was harsh and oppressive. He died in 1837. It is said that he struck his own coins in Peshawar with the approval of the Maharajah. This fits in with the date of the known coins, which range from 1834 to 1837. The Peshawar rupees of the Sikhs are well struck coins, generally showing the complete legends. The calligraphy and die cutting are of a high order, comparable to the best Mughal coins. They are not particularly common and those normally found weigh about 8.5 grams. A few

others have been observed, dated S.1894, the weight of which is 2 or more grams heavier. These have an obliquely milled edge and would appear to be specially struck specimens;

either presentation pieces or specimen strikings.

The copper coins issued during the Sikh occupation of Peshawar are very crude pieces invariably struck on old Durrani coins. A number were illustrated by Valentine (3).
# BIBLIOGHAFHY.

| (2). | Whitehead R.B. |
|:--- |:--- |
| (as | Valentine W.H. |
| (4). | Schulman J. |

## (as Valentine W.H.

## (4). Schulman J.

## (5) Rodgers C.J.

## (6). Rodgers C.J.

## (7). Codrington 0. Other works consulted:- Kushwant Singh.

"On tne Coins of the Sikhs." JsAc3<D. Vol %, 1581,

Catalogue of the ccins in the Oxford, 1934. Punjab Museum, Lahore. Vol.III.

The Copper Coins of India. Part II. The Punjab & contiguous Native States. London, 1914.

Sale Catalogue - Collection White King. Amsterdam, 18.12.1905.

Catalogue of the coins in the Calcutta, 1891. Government Museum, Lanore.

Catalogue of the coirfs collected Calcutta, 1894. by Chas.J.Rodgers and purchased by the Government of the Punjab. Part II.

A Manual of Musalman Numismatics. London, 1904.

A History of the Sikhs. Princeton, U.S.A., 1963. The Punjab Gazzetteer. Punjab Govt. 1914.

The authers are grateful for the assistance given in compiling this paper from:-

N.M.eLowick, C.K.Panish and Mrs.Tahira Azam Beg.

# MAP SHOWING TH LOCATION OF THE SIKH MINT TOWNS.

## هاهنا‎ a ددهي‎ 6 26 "si سمحي‎ eivinecgar 7 8

## 0 ها‎ so $$ = $$ AFGHANISTAN: om ee $$ = $$ Khost 0 Ismet. Mukevian rohere مواد د‎ a 3 ماعل‎ / ee & L '

Cis SuTpnets: ou @ - - \* sue  Sreres: hen و‎. wut

## we" oot --- ee oe

# ADDENDUM.

Since the publication of Information Sheet No.22, dealing with the goid and silver coins of the Amritsar mint, two rupees have come to light and it is felt that they deserve publication. Amritsar mint.

## Type I.

Ar rupee. Weight: 11.2 grams. Diameter: 22 mn. Od. > - حمطا‎ Arte eae زد‎ fo راق \| جرس لك.‏veR

# 3 ا كن وا \| من

Translation and transliteration: As Type I (Amritsar mint).

In the original paper it was stated that the earliest date found on coins of the Amritsar mint was S.1834, and it was assumed that minting there commenced in this year. In fact the striking of coin at Amritsar could have occurred as early as 5.1824 (AD 1767) and the rupee described above brings forward by two years the known date for production from this mint. This coin is of neater execution and thus enables both obverse and reverse legends to be read with some accuracy. Unknown mint.

| Ar rupee. | Weight: 10.7 grams. | Diameter: 20 mm. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Ob. | In complete but probably | ee ناا‎ |
| aie 1-3 | Rev. Incomplete | IAT, | Ob. In complete but probably ee ناا‎ aie 1-3 Rev. Incomplete IAT,

## VI" tie

Translation and Ob. As Type III (Amritsar mint). transliteration Rev. Zarb....?.... Sambat 1860

jalus? maimanat manus $$ = $$ Struck at...... in Samvat 1860 the year of auspicious accession.

Unfortunately, the greater part of the mint name is off the flan of this coin and what remains does not enable an accurate judgement to be made as to what it might be. There are a few interesting features on this coin. On the obverse is clearly the Hegira date of 1217 which corresponds accurately with the Samvat date of 1860. On the reverse Side is a rather'decorative type of pipal leaf and a katar. It would appear that the words "takht Akal bakht" are not present on this coin as they are on the contemporary

issue from the Amritsar mint, which also carries a different obverse legend. Until further specimens appear, this type cannot be attributed to any particular mint. +3 + + +د + + + +

Amritsar mint. Some further coins have recently been found and the following dates may be added to those previously listed:-

Type III. 5.1846. 3.1852. S.1864. 5.1865 (all rupees). Type V. S.1847 (rupee). Type VI. 5.1871 (rupee). S.1884/95 (s rupee).

It is also clear that there is considerable variation in the symbols and marks on the coins of this mint. Most of these are probably merely individual die variations and have little or no significance.
Photographs approximately 32 times normal size. a ea اام‎ ae د‎ 0-3 ae Plate Il.

# LEIAH.

Muzang Acchra