# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY INFORMATION SHEET Nov. 4 373 No.7

'The Coinageof the Indo-Scythians and Indo-Parthians

PART I THE INDO-SCYTHIANS The Scyths occupied the Transoxus region of Asia and were composed of many different groups of peoples. Mostly nomadic, some of these peoples formed different nations after migration, such as the Parthians. The correct name for the Scyths who entered India is 'Saka'. These particular Sakas entered India on being ousted from their homeland by an invasion of other Iranian nomads called the Yueh-Chih.

These people, the Yueh-Chih,had inhabited Kan-su in Western China but were themselves forced to migrate due to the pressure of another people whom we later know as the Huns. The Yueh-Chih horde fled West and displaced several peoples before encountering the Sakas about 160 B.C. ليليد The Sakas now formed a

horde themselves which fled é south and settled in Ferghana se 0.155 B.C. Thi This was in the territory of the Indo--Greeks. تحت‎ Prodded into movement once - aK  again by the Yueh-Chih, the $$ == $$ ey Sakas seem to have split up. LE SSERT Part of the horde burst باع ها/ سا‎ - CHIH-  through the northern provinces of Bactria into Parthia ١ EIT i Lavy from 138-123 B.C. They

m \* IIIT Ly killed the Parthian kings ب‎ PARTHIAN an Phraates II and Artabanus I / but were subdued by the - EMPIRE نه‎  mighty Mithradates II and settled by him in the Bast-+ SURE, ern province of his empire, اللا‎ sth nem Seistan (Sakastene). Here NG Dy

# L

already living Sakas from the time of the migrations six - €.15 B.C.  centuries earlier. $$ = $$ / SAKAS- there were apparently

## c.

# pres 6» \|\| \|\|ا

This province of Seistan was controlled by the powerful Parthian family

of the Suren who later became Quasi-independent and are associated with the Indo-Parthians who issued coins independently in India later.

Those Sakas who had remained in FPerghana were now induced to move (c.I20 B.C.), and under their leader MAUEBS (Moga) travelled via Kashgar to Gandhara and the Swat Valley. Some Sakas went even further by travelling via Patalene and eventually settling in Sind where they founded a dynasty of Satraps.

Maues successively wrested from the Indo-Greeks the provinces of Udayana (Swat Valley), Taxila, the lands East of the Indus, part of Eastern Gandhara, and towards the end of his reign the provinces East

of the Jhelum. His advance had forced a wedge between the Indo-Greeks and after possibly helping Strato I to power in the Eastern Kingdom he extinguished it shortly after 75 B.C. Maues was assisted in governing his territories by Satraps, some of whom called themselves Mahasatraps after his death.
The following family tree of Maues and his satraps is mostly conjectural, the details coming from the celebrated Mathura Lion-Capital. It has been suggested that ARTA might be Maues brother and KHARAOSTA his direct successor. The satraps whose names appear on coins are in capitals and their area of influence in brackets. DAMIJADA (Hazara)

ARTA = Pispari LIAKA KUSULAKA (Cuska and Taxila) \| KHARAOSTA + Abuhola Khalamasa Maja (Mathura) - - - PATIKA = RAJAVULA = Ayasi Kamuia Hayura \| MEVAKI MIYIKA SODASA Kalui Nada Diaka Hana

While Maues was triumphant in the East, another dynasty was achieving independence in Seistan. This was the family of Vonones. Many writers consider Vonones and his group to be Indo-Parthians though perhaps distinct from Gondophares and his successors, Konow even considers him to be identical with the royal Parthian king of that name. Other writes have considered him as an Indo-Scythian or Saka and for the purposes of this Information Sheet I shall include him with the latter and thus be able to divide this sheet into two distinct parts. Vonones is associated

on his coins with his brothers (not always meant literally) and joint rulers and issues coins in Seistan and Western Gandhara. Shortly after Vonones ceath the Empire falls to Azes I who might have been his nephew.

Azes acquired territory at the expense of both the Indo-CGreeks and Maues. These included Gandhara, Northern Arachosha and the Paronamisus. He lost ground however to the Fushanas (dominant tribe of the Yueh-Chih) north of the Hindu Kush (Paropamisus).

ores: RouTE OF MAUES Azes was followed by Azilises ساس‎ ROUTE oF Vowones who issued some beautiful tetra-- AN SUCCESSORS drachms and then Azes II. In Azes II's reign the dynasty and Empire collapse. The western

## issyke

Kua! provinces fall to the Indo- L-Issy a ¢ Parthians and Satraps of Bajaur AG ع "الى‎ while the South-East falls to cane Rajavula and the Satraps of Ma"ies thura. 7g oe

The Empire was also weakened due tothe pressure of the Kushans from the north, and the history of the period becomes obscure with a great deal of imitation of coin types, mainly by the Kushans.

# Ty;
The Vonones group are associated on their coins as follows and this could be a 'family tree'. Some of the 'brothers' and 'nephews' issued coins as independant kings. \|

# 1 با SESIRILAPS SENONOV SIRYLAPS )‏AROHALAPS(

# ‏SEMADAGALAPS

# SEZA ‏I

# ‏SESILIZA

# \| SEZA ‏II Leke« Batkhas ©

# XC $$ =~ $$

# GZ Za. Kut SELLE FERGHANA Av, Z ZZ o Kashgar

# 22 \\

## MIA A Pushkala vats FART g mee', arxcila عون‎ aka Mathura.٠ tee aye dee eee mines
The Indo-Scythic Mints, Monograms and sequence of rulers.

It has been considered for a long time that the monograms on Indo-Greek and the later Indo-Scythic or Saka coins held the clue to the whereabouts of their mints. A monogram whether it be of a city or magistrate was issued only in a particular locality and often variations of the same monogram exist. Several different monograms are known to be the issues of one mint. It is thought that only five or six mints existed in the Indo-Greek period and the same or less for the succeeding period.

A.D.H.Bivar in the Numismatic Chronicle, 1965, and G.K.Jenkins in the Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, I955, have shown how certain mints can be identified by intelligent analysis. A summarised version of the latter article anrears below. For the many theories that exist concerning this period's history I advise the reading of the whole bibliography. For this sheet I have adopted the theories that seem most reasonable to me.

From Dr.Jenkins articles the following conclusion seems likely concerning the changing of hands of the various mints and areas.

# ARACHOSTA GANDHARA TAXILA EAST OF THE JHELUM Vonones Spalagadames? Spalahora Maues? Maues

Spalirises Apollodotus II? Apollodotus II Apollodotus II Hippostratus Hippostratus Zoilus 1 Spal/Azes Azes I Azes I, Dionysius rei ik: "he lake Apollophanes Azes I Azilises izilises Azilises Strato II Azes II Azes II Strato II and Strato III As pavarma Rajavula Rajavula Gondophares Gondophares Sasan Gondophares

There are four mints that are tentatively attributed to the

Sakas: Taxila, Pushkalavati, an 'Arachosiant mint and possibly Kapisa.

In the two articles that Dr. Jenkins published in the Journal of the

Numismatic Society of India in 1955 and 1956 you will find all the

major coins listed in this sheet and catalogue, with details of where

these coins are published. These articles are difficult to obtain but

are essential reading for someone who wishes to look at this series.

The accompanying catalogue,which is as complete as I can make it,is

more than sufficient for someone who wishes to identify coins or merely collect by types.
' TAXILA A major city and mint with several monograms and combinations of

## "the same-.٠ Most monograms appear in conjunction with Kharosthi letters.

Some of the monograms attributed to Taxila are numbers 2, 6, 9, 10, 13, و14‎ I8, 34-38 and 40 on the list below.

A study of the mint reveals an interesting sequence of rulerse.g.

Maues issued silver Zeus standing/Nike and copper Elephant Head/Caduceus

and was followed by the Indo-figeek king Apollodotus II and then Hippostrates for the first time. Taxila was then taken for a while by Azes I but lost to Hippostratos again. Finally Azes re-took Taxila and it remained in Saka hands until Gondophares succeeded Azes II.

PUSHKALAVATI or Peukelaotis is recognised as the mint that issued the Pallas reverse silver coins from the time of Hippostratos to Azes II. It's monogram is number I9, usually witha Kharosthi letter. The copper coin of Azes II Goddess/Bubl type was issued by this mint.

\*ARACHOSIA' The coins attributed to this mint are identified by their style and include the following types; Vonones/Spalahora M King mounted with spear(KMS)/Zeus & Pallas St./Herakles st. Spalyris/Spalagadama £ xus/ Herakles st. Spalirises (as King's brother) 8ه‎ KMS/Zeus Spalirises (as King) @ KMS/Zeus قله‎ King walking/Zeus enthroned Spalirises/Azes 8 KMS/Zeus ®King mounted with whip/Bow and arrow Azes I RB KMS/Zeus King on camel/Bwll Azes I 2 KNS/Lamp Goddess

## #& KvS/Herakles seated

& XMS/Bull Azilises 2 KMS/Lamp Goddess & KMS/Herakles seated.

After Azilises this mint falls into the hands of satraps and the Indo-Parthians.

KAPISA G.K.Jenkins considers that Maues possibly struck coins at this mint but not the Azes group. In fact he considers that coins of the Hermaios type were issued continuously at this mint whether, not it was in the hands of the Indo--Greeks of the Hermaios line. The Maues coin attributed to this mint is the rare Zeus enthroned type.

It is worth mentioning that the way to identify the silver of Azes I from those of Azes II is that on the former's coins the King is mounted on horseback holding a spear while the latter holds a whip. The copper is more complicated but full lists of known coin types are included below.

# INDO-SCYTHIC MONOGRAMS & v @\|F Ik (eh 8 ل لحلا‎ a K\\A

# a ١ Z\| B \|B قو دب ‏tu فو

## tLe

| sé | (ye ae 9 |
|:--- |:--- |
| sho | 7\\| IN -محوة‎ |
| PN | A |

# sho 7\| IN -محوة‎

# PN A

# يد

| 364\} | SoD |
|:--- |:--- |
| PsP | +\\|-& A |
| Bitte | 17° |

# PsP +\|-& A

## Bitte 17°
# KHAROSTHI INSCRIPTIONS ON INDO-SCYTHIC AND INDO-PARTHIAN COINS.

With the exception of the still undeciphered Indus Valley script the

two most ancient scripts of India are the Brahmi and Kharosthi. former, written from left to right,

Kharosthi, written from right to left, floumodern scripts of India. The is the ancestor of nearly all the

rished from the third century B.C. to the third century A.D. in North-

Western India and till possibly as late as the fifth century in

Central Asia. It has been suggested that the script came from the west, possibly during the Achaemenid rule of North-Bestern India, and was a development of the Aramaic alphabet.

The KharosthT script underwent several changes in it's history

as the letter forms changed and completely new characters were added. « During the period of the Indo-Greeks it was customary to issue a bi-

lingual coinage. The obverse of their coins had written in Greek the King's name and epithets, while the reverse had the same in Kharosthi. fhe Indo-Scythians on invading the Indo-Greek dominions naturally

adopted this procedure as did the Kusanas in their turn.

In the following tables are found all the characters in use during this period plus some of the commonest epithets and phrases from

## Englvh G reat Kharesthi

\| Ke BAZIAEQE \| وميه‎, Mahateyase invincible AN\\KH TOY امه مم‎ hetasga, A rata) tase, Aprefihatasa Brothers Sow AAEMPIAEQRE \| Bhradaeutrasa Bro ther AKEACCE \[Bkreta

| NIKHOofoY | Jayadhatasa |
|:--- |:--- |
| METAACY | Mohatasa, Mahatakaga, Nahanta Fal; |

## '

Son ه كوم ارب 6 كا‎ 1G ener Stroteaasga SS هيبمنويرع‎ 222114002 \| Tredatasa Creaddact سما مسن‎ © achadhtwmathidasa.
| yo | gha | ohh |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| chia | chi |  |

| 4> Na Wi Vary \| ta ti te tu to tha ها‎ de عد مود‎ ee a ريد‎ 1 thu de da نأن‎ dha Ani NA nA م هم‎ \| ا ا ا ل ال‎ f jh \| PU Po Porm ba Ota bha \| 6K tha \| ma me

## in أ‎ 4 \|i A juvuy\] w WA MA mo mown! Ya YI yu ye Yo yorum

Y wasp صر‎ PS fanvrAtT aA \[NA\] WA \[A oN TA PQ To yon La بق‎ ta VO vi

= ل‎ Ja GE جا‎ Ss يو اا‎ ee ss ee Ve von \| ga. غ5‎ Su $e $$ $0 $$ "Sa pA $e ima jh \| 7ل‎ ae Oe Es ee ااا ا سا‎ aoe

$$ $0 $$ $i su Se som \| ha hi he ho م م امرض مم‎ \|e 112+ 1%

| ham | kro |  |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| \[thre | tra | tia |  |
| dra \[ | ohra | Pre | thre |

| Taha | عسي |
|:--- |:--- |
| \[He | ند‎ |

# OBVERSE LEGEND

# YDIAKIA YAPAEAA ‏YOT ع ماع" الماع

BACIAEUWC mm suse spatanora BROTHER OF THR KING

# REVERSE LEGEND

(Coin of) the pious Spalagadama son of Spalahora ra ho la Spa

## ka a ia aay i 0 Be a ee Spalahora putrasa dhramiasa Spalagadamasa
# BIBLIOGRAPHY Buhler Indische Palaeographie 1896

5.Konow Corpus Inscriptionum Indicorum,, Historical Introductions. Vol II,pt I.

Das Gupta ®he developement of Kharosthi Script Calcutta 1958 Marshall Taxila. 2 Vols Cambridge I950 J.%.Van Lohuizen de Leew The Scythian Period B.N.Mukherjee An Arrippan Source Calcutta 9

## Cunninghan Coins of the Indo-Scythians, Sakas and Kushanas re--printed from the Numismatic Chronicle 1888,90 and 92.

Whitehead Goins of the Indo-Greeks, Sakas and Pahlavas Re-printed from the Nymismatic Chronicle 1940-0 ٠

Many of the most important additions to our knowledge of this period are

printed in Journals, too numerous and detailed to mention. A few are listed below but a fair number can be found in:

## The Bibliography

of Indian coins Part I C.R.Binghal. N.S.I. 1950. A supple

ment is due out soon. Also useful is the Bibliography in A.K.Narain's 'The Indo-Greeks' by the Oxford Univ. Press.

Journal of the Numismatic Society of India Many articles principally

Vol. XVII, Part II. Indo-Scythic mints. C.K.Jenkins.

Numismatic notes and Monographs No.4 The coin types of the Saka-Pahlava kings of India. G.K.Jenkins and A.K.Narain.

Sakas and Pahlavas. K.W.Dobbins. Due to be printed soon.

Journal of the American Numismatic Somiety several papers. e.g. On Greeks and Sakas in India. Bachhofer I94I

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Many papers, see the catalogue.

Numismatic Chronicle See above, also D.W.MacDowall, The dynasty of the

later Indo-Parthians, 1965. Dobbins, Sanaberes and the Gondophares dynasty.

For illustrations of the coins apart from the above see the report by

Curiel and Schlumberger Tresors monetaires d'Afghanistan. 2322138

There have been some large collections in sale catalogues, notably that of

Major-General Haughton in 1958, Sotheby's. The Standard Catalogues are;

Catalogue of the coins in the Punjab Museum, Lahore Vol.I. Whitehead.

Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. Vol I.1906. Oxford.

Catalogue of the Indian coins in the British huseum. Gardiner 1880.London.

The first and last of these exist as modern re-prints.

# RC. SEN,
# MAUES COIN TYPES. INDO\*SCYTHIANS part I

Shaded coins are copper. Legends omitted from most illustrations. Type I Obverse Legend;

# BAZINENE BAZIAENN METAAOY MAYoyY

Reverse Legen@; Rajatirajasa mahatasa Moasa Obv. Zeus carrying long sceptre, standing to l.

with r. arm outstretched. Rev. Winged Nike to r. with wreath and palm. Tetradrachms and é 'drachms known.

Type 2 Unique in P.M.C.Lahore. Legends as on one.

Obv. Enthroned deity to.عم‎ with long sceptre in l. hand and r. arm outstretched. Rev. Zeus with long sceptre standing to left with Nike on outstretched right hand..drachm only.

Type 3 Legends as before. Obv. Deity in Biga Rev. Enthroned Zeus left with long sceptre.

Known inTetradrachm8. jiarachm size and also square -drachm (latter is unique in this Indo-Scythian series).

Type 4 Legend on reverse only - modelled on coin of

Demetrios Obv. In border of reels amd pellets, elephants head

to right with trunk upraised and bell round heck. Rev. Caduceus and on either side; BAXIAERL MAYoY Type 5 Legends as on number one.

OBV. Artemis radiate to r. with veil floating round her head. Rev. Humped bull to left.

Type 6 Legends as on number one round three sides.

Obv. Lunar goddess with long sceptre standing to front between two star-like ornaments.

Rev. Winged Nike to left with wreath and palm. Type 7 Legends as before.

Obv. Zeus with long sceptre in left hand to left on throne; right hand extended to a small radiate deity to left. Rev. City goddess with turreted crown std. to fromt, veil in r. hand, long sceptre in l. Type 8 Legends as before.

Obv. Zeus as on No. I Rev. Male deity with pointed cap standing to front.
## this type, Type II As

Type 9 Obverse leg. as reverse of type 4. Reverse legend; Maharagasa Moasa. Obv. Apollo std. to front with arrow in r. bow in l. Rev. Within dotted border, tripod lebes.

Type 10 Legends as on No. I Obv. Poseidon standing to front with long trident in

left hand and right foot resting on a small radiate figure underneath him, r. hand on knee. Rev. Female figure to front between trees( possibly a Bacchante figure among vines) On smaller coins of Poseidon's r. hand is outstretched.

last except that with r. hand he hurls thunderbolt at captive(not illustrated)

Type I2 Same but Poseidon grasps an object(aplustre or palm branch)

with his left hand which the small figure clings to.

Type 13 Legends as before. Obv. Male deity striding to left with club in right hand. Long spear in left hand and surrounded by flowing draperies. Rev. Goddess to right with flowing draperies. Type 14 Legends as previously.

Obv. King on horseback to right with couched lanae. Rev. as on Type 6

Type 15 Obv.as last but king holds whip (as in the

illustration) Rev. Goddess to right with flying draperies; long sceptre over left shoulder. DA MI in r. upper field. (Dami jada, a satrap of Maues?)

Type 16 Legends as before. Obv. In square pellet and reel border elephant with

wreath in uplifted trunk running to right. Rev. In square frame king to front seated cross-- legged on raised cushion. Sword on lap?

Type I7 Obv. as last Rev. Humped bull to right.

## Type 8

Obv. Elephant walking to left with trunk down Rev. Similar to last but humped bull to left.

Type I9 Legends as on No,9 Obv. Horse to right Rev. Bow in case.
Type 20 Legends as on number I Obv. Male figure holding ankus Rev. Aegis

Type 2I Legends as on I Obv. King right on horseback, whip over shoulder and couched lance. Rev. Female figure facing diademed. Holds right a patera containing offerings. Left hand rests on wheel. Turreted crown on head.

Type 22 Legends as on I Obv. Heracles facing, holds in left hand a club and lion's skin. Rev. Maneless lion.

Type 23 Legends as on I Obv. Zeus Nikephoros enthroned, before him the forepart of an elephant with trunk upraised. Rev. Heracles facing, in left hand club and lion's skin, with right crowns himself?

Maues copper generally exists in three sizes, No. 9 for example also exists in the larger size.

Most of Maues types are taken directly from those of the Indo-Greeks such as Antialkidas, Demetrios and Strato. The name DAMI appears on at least coin types I3, I5, and 2I. An inscription at Shahdaur inscribed probably during Azes' reign gives Damijada as a satrap of Maues and the conclusion that the word on the coins and the Satrap are connected is very enticing.

The silver coins are scarce and much forged, the copper is scarce too, especially in good condition, type 4 being by far the commonest type.

All the Sakas and Indo-Parthians struck exclusively in copper and Silver.

# VONONES WITH SPALAHORA

# Legends Obv. BAZIAEN2 BAEIAEQIN METAAoy oNQNOY

Rev. Maharajabhrata dhramikasa Spalahorasa Obv. King on horse right holding spear Rev. Zeus standing with thunderbolt in right hand sceptre inleft. Drachms and Tetradrachms (D, T) tied

## San

# St

Legends as on silver Obv. Heracles standing with lion skin and cluh in left hand, crowning himself with right hand. Rev. Pallas standing left. Both copper and silver are very scarce.
# VONONES WITH SPALAGADAMA

OBV. legend as on coins of Vonones and Spalahora REV. Spalahoraputrasa dhramiasa Spalagadamasa

Both the silver drachms and tetradrachms have the same types as the previous Silver of Vonones and Spalahora The copper is of the same types as previous. Both denominations, silver and copper are scarce.

# SPALYRIS WITH SPALAGADAMA

# OBV.legena CNAAYPIOCL AIKAIDY AAEAGDY

# TOY BATCINWEC

REV. legend Spalahoraputrasa dhramiasa Spalagadamasa Obv. King on horse r. holding spear Rev. Heracles seated left on rock. scarce.

# SPALIRISES

# Legends (a) BALIAEWIL AAEAGOT CNAAIPICY

## (\>) BACIAEWC METAAoY CNAAIPICeY

(c) RACINEWCL BACIAEWN METANY ع‎ 08/1107 (d) Maharajabhrata dhramiasa Spalirifasa (e) Maharajasa mahatakasa Spaliriéasa

Type I Silver.Obverse and reverse as silver of Vonones with Spalahore but

legends as above (a) and (d). Tetradrachms and drachms known Type 2 Silver. As type one but legends (b) and (e). Drachms only.

Type 3 Legends (c) and (e) Obv. King walking left, holding ankus in right hand, whip over shoulder and bow at side. Rev. Zeus enthroned.

A scarce coin but commoner than the previous few types.

# SPALIRISES WITH AZES I

## Legends on both types; Obv. BACIAEWC METAAY CMAAIICT

Rev. Maharajasa Mahatakasa Ayasa Type I Silver. As the previous type I. Tetradrachms and drachms. Type 2

Obv. King on horseback right holding whip over shoulder, holding out ankus(?). Rev. Bow and arrow.

The silver coins are rare, particularly the tetradrachms (as with all the Vonones group) and this last copper coin is excessively rare.
# BAS\\AENE BAZIAENN METAADY AZDY Ba einen BAZIAENN MEFAACY 82-07

# ¥

\\AENC BA bal ES ل لياط‎ ME ا‎ hi PN\} Maharajasa rajadirajasa mahatasa Ayasa

## Legends; 0 50216592 BAZIAEQN METANCY 26خ‎ ب(‎

## Type I

Obv. Zeus st. left. Transverse sceptre. 8 Rev. Nike standing right. e Tetradrachms and drachms

Type 2 Obv. King on horse r. holding spear - obverse of all the other types of Azes 1......... (db) Rev. Zeus 1٠. st. right arm extended, transverse sceptre. (e) Tetradrachms only

Type 3 Reverse. Nike standing facing. (e) Obverse legend (a) Illustrated in Cunningham, Coins of the Indo-Scythian Saka and Kushanas. (Reprinted from NC 1888,90 and 92.) Tetradrachms only Type 4 Obverse legend (a) Reverse Zeus Nikephoros standing left (f) Tetradrachms only Type 5 Obverse legend (b) Tetradrachm only

Reverse Zeus st. facing, thunderbolt in r. transverse sceptre. (e) 6 As five but legends (a) and (e). Drachms only Type 7 As five but legends (d) and (e). Drachms only Type 8 Obv. legend (b)

Rev. Zeus facing, thunderbolt in r. upright sceptre (e)

Tetradrachms Type 9 As eight but (c) and (e) slight style differences Tet.s. Type 10 As eight but (a) and (e). Drachms only, also in style of type 9.

Type II Obv. legend (b) Rev. Pallas standing left, thunderbolt in r. shield on 1. arm.(e) Tetradrachms only

Type 12 As II but legends (a) and (e). Drachms only. --- Type I3

Obverse legend (a) Reverse Goddess st. 1., palm in 1., lamp in r. (e) Tet. and Dr.s. Bronze.

Type I4 Obv. Poseidon st. r. with foot on river god. r.hand on

knee, trident in left. (a) Rev. Yakshi between vines (e)

Type I5 Obverse. Male deity moving left with club in right hand

and trident in left. (a) Illustrated in Marshall, Taxila (Cambridge 1940) pl.239, 127-8

Type 16 King on horse holding spear (bd) Reverse Humped bull right (e) In 3 sizes. Type I7 Same but round and (a) on obverse.

Type 18 Obv. King on camel r. holding ankus (c) Rev. Humped bull r. with lowered head (e)

Type 9? Obv. King on horse holding spear (a) Rev. Heracles seated 1. on rock (e)

Type 20 Obv. Male. figure standingewith ir. arm extended, palm in left. (a)... Rev. Humpedrbutt right (e) TIllustrafed in Cunningham VIII 5. Type 21 Same but humped bull left. Type 22 Obv. Hephaistos standing facing (a) Rev. Lion right. (e) Illustrated in Cunningham, VI.7. Type 23 Obv. King on horse holding spear (a) Rev. Heracles st. crowning himself (e)

Of the copper, types 14, 16, I8 and I9 are fairly common but the others are rare. Most of the silver is uncommon or rare except types 58-0
# AZES I WITH AZILISES

TYPES same as AZES I type I3 with Obv. Legend (a) and reverse Azilises legend (f)

# AZILISES

# (a)BASINEQE BAZINEQN METAAOY 2615"

# (bo) BASINEQNE BASIAERN METAAoY Az\\niCeoy

# ACINENT BACINEQN METAA OY 521١1667 ( ( Legends; (a)

# 821/1207 لاق مم \]ع ذا BAEINEQAN‏ 0 )f ‏1 - 1

aharajasa rajadirajasa mahatasa Ayilishasa 4م همل‎ aharajasa rajarajasa mahatasa Ayilishasa aharajasa mahatasa Ayilishasa

Type I King on horse right holding whip (a) Rev. City goddess standing, Zeus standing(e) Tetradrachms and drachms known.

| Type 2 | Obverse exactly as last. | Reverse Zeus standing right (e) | Tetradrachms and drachms known |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Type 3 | Obverse exactly as type I | Reverse Lakshmi on lotus between elephants on latus leaves (e) | Tetradrachms and drachms known. |
| Type 4 | Obverse Zeus Nikephoros standing left (a) | Reverse Dioscuri on horseback right (e) | Tetradrachms and drachms known |
| Type 5 | Obv. Zeus enthroned right holding Nike (a) | Rev. Dioscuri on horseback r. as last (e) | Tetradrachms and drachms known. |

Type 3 Obverse exactly as type I Reverse Lakshmi on lotus between elephants on latus leaves (e) Tetradrachms and drachms known.

Type 4 Obverse Zeus Nikephoros standing left (a) Reverse Dioscuri on horseback right (e) Tetradrachms and drachms known

Type 5 Obv. Zeus enthroned right holding Nike (a) Rev. Dioscuri on horseback r. as last (e) Tetradrachms and drachms known.

Type 6 Obverse King on horseback holding whip as on I. (a) Reverse Dioscuri standing holding spears (e) Tetradrachms and drachms known.
Type 7 Obv.King on horseback as I (a) Rev. One of the dioscuri standing (e) Tetradrachms and drachme known

Type 8 Obv. King on horseback holding whip as on I (a) Rev. City goddess armed, standing holding wreath and palm (e) Drachms only

# eee

Type 9 Obv. King on horse back but holds spear as on coins of Azes I(b) Rev. City goddess standing left with palm and lamp. (f) T and D.s

Type IO As last but legends (a) and (f). Tetradrachms and drachms Type II As last but legends (d) and (f). Tetradrachms only

Type I2 As last but goddess holds wreath, not lamp. Leg. (b) and(f) Tetradrachms and drachms. See Curiel and Schlumberger, Paris 1953.

Type I3 Obv. King on horseback as on 9. (d). On drachms legend is (a). Rev. Pallas standing 2teft,, thunderbolt inygght hand and shield extended. (f) Tetradrachms and drachms knowm.

The silver coins of Azilises are numismatic masterpieces and generally very rare. With these coins the Indo-Scythic coinage reaches it's peak. The commonest coins by far are types 9, 10 and IIe It is generally true that the following copper coinage is scarce to rare despite the variety of types and none can be said to be common. All Azilises copper coins are square.

Type I40bv. King mounted holding spear (c) Rev. Bull left (without exergue line) (f) Typel5S Same but bull right

Type 16 Same but legends (a) and (f), bull right, with exérgue line and a smaller size coin.

Type I7 As 16 but bull left. Variety has Obv. leg.(d).

Type 18 As type 15, legends (c) and (f) and a very small sized coin. Type 19 Obv. As on 14, legend (c) Rev. Elephant right (ع)‎

Type 20 Obverse as on 19 but without spear (c) Reverse Heracles seated on rock facing left, holding ¢elub (ع)‎

Type 1 Obv. King standing right armed (a) Rev. Male deity? standing right holding out wreath (e) --- Elephant left (a) Bull left (e)

23 Exactly same as 22 but bull and elephant right.

Obverse Hephaistos standing facing (a) Reverse Lion right (e)

Type 25 Obverse Heracles standing facing (a) Reverse Horse right (e) Illus. Cunningham 7111

\|: Type 6 Obverse Male figure standing facing holding whip (7?) Reverse Lion right (7?) Illustrated in Journal Asiatic Soc. Bengal 1835 XXI,7.

Type 27 Obverse Indra on elephant facing, flanked by other elephants (a) Reverse Goddes st.l. holding lamp and palm. (e) In B.M.

Type 28 Obv. City goddess enthroned right (a) Rev. Male deity as on next but 1. (e) \| Marshall, Taxila 1955. pl.240, 165.

Type 29 Obv. Male deity holding club and Nike, st. r. (a) Rev. Goddess standing right with lamp. (e) \| In the B.M. Type 30

As with previous copper coins some of the above are known in more than one size.

# AZILISES WITH AZES 11

## )a SREAIZAB NQEAIZAB YONATEM ‏YOSIAIZA مه nees ea 2 SAO EAERI:NISEAIGAR YSAATEM ‏YOEINIZA

(c) BASINENES..... MHTAACY AZAIECY Gie!) - Maharajasa rajarajasa mahatasa Ayasa

Silver Type I Obverse King on horse right holding spear (a) Tetradrachm only

Reverse Pallas left with thunderbolt and shield (d) as Azilises I3. Illustrated in Cunningham VII A2.

Type 2 Drachm only Obv. King on horse right holding whip (c) Rev. Zeus Nikephoros left (d)
AZILISES WITH AZES II cont. Bronze Type I Obverse and reverse as Azilises type 25 Obv. leg.(b), rev.leg. (a)

# AZES a هل‎ 5/5100 BAZIAEQN NETAROY, AZo ١ 86210695 BAZ\\AEQN METAADY AZOY

- Maharajasa rajarajasa mahatasa Ayasa (d) Maharajasa rajadirajasa mahatasa Ayasa (e) Maharajasa mahatasa dhramiasa rajadirajasa Ayasa Silver

Type I Obv. King on horse holding whip as on Azilises type I (a); Reverse Zeus Nikephoros standing left (c)

Tetradrachms and drachms known, degenerate into base silver with corrupt legends and a reduction in size.

Type 2 Obv. As on I but legend (b) Rev. Poseidon standing r. with trident tipped sceptre (c) Tetradrachms and drachms

Type 3 Obv. As on 2 leg.(b) on tetradrachms but (a) on drachms. Rev. Pallas standing left, right arm extended, shield on left shoulder. (c) Tetradrachms and drachms

Type 4 Obverse As on I Legend (b) on tetradrachms but (a) on drachms. Reverse Pallas standing facing, crowning herself with the r., shield on left shoulder, transverse spear. (c) Tetredrachms and drachms

Type 5 Obverse As on I (b) Reverse Pallas standing right, right arm extended, shield on left

shoulder, transverse spear. (c) Tetradrachms and drachms

Type 6 Exactly as 5 but Pallas's r. arm at side.Tetradrachms and

| drachms | Type 7 | Obverse As on I but legend (7?) | Reverse As on 5 but legend (d) Tetradrachms only. Late, base issue |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Type 8 | Obverse As on the last, in front i و‎ 8 kushan symbol. | Reverse City goddess left with cornucopiae | Late base issue, probably of the Kushan period |
| The Zeus type tetradrachms and drachms are very common. Type 7 i8 common | also. | Only type two can be said to be fairly scarce. | Type 8 is scarce. |

Type 8 Obverse As on the last, in front i و‎ 8 kushan symbol. Reverse City goddess left with cornucopiae Late base issue, probably of the Kushan period

The Zeus type tetradrachms and drachms are very common. Type 7 i8 common also. Only type two can be said to be fairly scarce. Type 8 is scarce. --- II AZES II continued. Bronze Type I Obv. Bull right (b) Rev. Lion right (c) In three sizes Type 2 As last but square and medium sized Type 3 As two but small and Obv. Lion (a) Rev. Bull (c)

Type 4 Obv. Elephant right (b) Rev. Bull right (as on type I obv.) (c) In three sizes

Type 5 Same but very small and square. Legends as follows; Obve BALIAENE METAACY AZOoY Rev. Maharajasa mahatasa -Ayasa

Type 6 Obv. King seated on cushions. In right hand ankus, sword across body. (a) Rev. Hermes standing left. (c) Known in 3 sizes. Type 7 As 6 but square and small

Type 8 City goddess enthroned left (»b) Rev. Hermes standing left as last but variation in style(c)

These first four illustrated types are reasonably common. Type 9 Obverse as the obverse of 6

Reverse Pallas standing facing (c) Large round and very rare. In B.M.

Type IO Obverse King on horse holding whip (b)

Reverse Exactly as on 9 Medium sized and square - very rare. Illustrated in J.A.S.B. 1897 Pl.I.2.

Type II Obverse as 10 Medium sized and square. Very rare

Reverse Zeus Nikephoros left (c) Illus. in J.A.S.B.Num. Suppl.XIV pl 34,15.

Type I2 Obv. Lakshmis standing with flower in r. (b) Rev. Bull right (c) Scarce Type I3

Obv. Lion right Legend (7) Rev. City goddess standing left (c) Rare

Type 4 Obv. Hermes standing left (a) Rev. As on 13 Rare

Type I5 Obv. King on horse right holding whip, in front &

Rev. Lion right. Probably issued by Kushanas with silver type 8.