# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY INFORMATION SHEET. No.5 (jens درت ا‎

# MULTIPLE DIRHEMS OF THE SAMANID-GHAZNAVID PERIOD FROM NORTH-EAST AFGHANISTAN,

# by MICHAEL MITCHINER

These large silver coins were struck by the Samanid dynasts and by their

Ghaznavid successors in the north-east provinces of Afghanistan throughout most

of the tenth century AD. The earliest multiple dirhems were struck during the

reign of the Samanid sovereign Nasr 11 ibn Ahmad (AH. 301-3313; AD.914-943) and can

be dated to the 320's of the Hijra. The series virtually endg with a common issue

struck by the Ghaznavid sovereign Yemin al daulah Mahmud in AH. 389, there being only one later issue known.

The mints that struck multiple dirhems lay along the northern slopes of the

Hindu Kush and, for the most part, followed the distribution of active siiver

mines cited by contemporary Arab historians, The main mints were sited in

Badakhshan and Tokharestan provinces though a few multiple dirhems were struck at Gharjistan and Bamian (see Map).

Badakhshan province, from which the majority of multiple dirhems emanate,

was situated at the eastern end of the north Afghan plateau in a region where,

according to contemporary Arab historians, the main activities were farming and

particularly the mining not only of gold and silver but also of lapis lazuli,

rubies, garnet, rock crystal and asbestos. Three borders of the province were

largely defined by the geography of the region and only on the west was there an

arbitrary frontier with the neighbouring province of Tokharestan. To the east

Badakhshan was limited by the Pamir mountains and to the south rose the Hindu

Kush, To the north the river Oxus formed the provincial frontier and to the west

the border with Tokharestan was set between the towns of Tayakan and Kishm.

Provincial frontiers were not completely static and for some years the town of

Andijaragh, which lay in the foothills of the Pamirs, came under the sway of Badakhshan's governor Al Harith ibn Harb.

In the south-western corner of Badakhshan province the position of Panjhir

and its relationship to two other important towns, Farwan and Anderabah, is best

defined by following the route of the main pass traversing the Hindu Kush from

the Kabul valley in the south to the north-east Afghan plateau. These three towns,

which all lay close to the pass, each possessed its own mint and on the coins

struck for their Samanid sovereigns each mint acknowledged the authority of a

different series of provincial governors. From the south the route left the Kabul

valley and followed the Panjhir river up past Farwan. This town was the northern

outpost of the Kabul valley province and in the 330'3 AH acknowledged the

governorship of a certain Ahmad ibn Yusuf. From the 360's Farwan, along with the

rest of the Kabul valley province was part of the Ghaznavid state which, wtil

the 380's, remained a vassal kingdom within the Samanid realm. Farwan did not

take part in the multiple dirhem coinage. Proceeding north up the pass one reaches

Panjhir which was one of the most important Afghan silver mining towns during the --- $$ ro 2 >= $$

tenth century. The Panjhir district formed the south-western outpost of Badakhshan

province. From 330/1 AH until 384 its coinage was restricted to multiple dirhems

and many of these acknowledged the authority of Al Harith ibn Harb who governed

Badakhshan province for the Samanids during half a century from o.334 until 384.

Continuing along the route from Panjhir one moves westwards across the Khawak

Pass and thence down the Anderabah river, past the town of the same name, to turn

northwards along the middle reaches of this river that leads to the Oxus.

Tokharestan province, the western neighbour of Badakhshan, extended from the

Oxus in the north to the Hindu Kush in the south and from Badakhshan in the east

to the province of Juzjan-Balkh in the west. The two main towns, Walwaliz (Qunduz)

and Tayakan, were situated in the north of the province along the route from Balkh

to Badakhshan while the chief mint, Anderabah, lay in the southerm mountains close to the silver mines.

Moving westwards along the tracks of these silver mines that extended from

Badakhshan province through the southern reaches of Tokharestan one reaches the

# other provinces that struck multiple dirhems, a continuation of the silver mining ®

region, Gharjistan-Bamian. This mountainous region was centred on a group of east-

west valleys in the northern part of the central Afghan massif, Bamian, in a fertile

valley towards the east of this region, was a prosperous city that exercised con-

trol over a substantial district. Further to the west the homeland of the Gharj

people was centred on the upper reaches of the Murghab river. The name of their

province, Gharjistan or Gharj al Shar, literally meant 'Mountains of the Shar' and

referred both to the local people, the Gharj or mountain people, and to the ruler who always bore the title Shar.

# SAMANID SOVEREIGNS AND THEIR GOVERNORS.

The period when these multiple dirhems were struck was a time of political

## and economic crisis in the Samanid realm. It saw the progressive de-centralisation

of authority that culminated in the replacement of the dynasty at the end of the 6

tenth century by the Ghaznavids in Afghanistan and by the Qarakhanids (Ilak Khans) north of the river Oxus.

Authority over the various provinces was exercised by three ranks of officials

who, on occasions, all placed their names on coins. The Provincial Governor belonged

to the lowest of these ranks, his authority being restricted to his own province.

South of the Oxus the provincial Samanid governor was responsible to the Governor

of Khorasan who had his seat at Nishapur in N.W. Afghanistan and was himself

responsible to the Samanid sovereign in Bokhara for all the provinces south of the

river Oxus. The highest of these three ranks of officials was composed of members

in the Central Government. They exercised authority and some of them, such as the

chamberlains Faiq and Bektuzun and the vizir Tash, placed their names on coins, both north and south of the Oxus.

During the first three decades of the fourth century AH the north-east Afghe»

provinces of the Samanid realm were the charge of a single governor, although from --- \| ا ب ا ا انس‎.

314 until 320 they were ruled by the rebel Qaratekin. After the authority of the

Samanid Nasr 11 had been restored in 320 Balkatekin was placed in charge and held

office until 326 when he was succeeded by Qaratekin, now restored to favour, who

governed from 326 until 330. During the years 331 to 333 the system of provincial

government was re-organised in N.E. Afghanistan and each province acquired an

individual governor. The province of Juzjan-Balkh was governed partly by Qatakin

and partly by Mohammed ibn Farighun until 348 but thereafter (Qatakin having been

transferred to Bokhara) the Farighunid family continued to rule the province until

the 390's and extended their authority over Gharjistan to the south. Tokharestan

province was now governed by Harb ibn Sahlan who had previously been an associate

governor of this province under Balkatekin. His family continued to govern

Tokharestan province in the person's of Harb's son Maktum (ibn Harb) and his

grandson Sahlan (ibn Maktum) until 378. Badakhshan also acquired its own governor

in the person of Al Harith ibn Harb who remained in office until 384 and was

## probably a brother of Maktum ibn Harb, The governor of the Kabul valley province

© was Ahmad ibn Yusuf whose father had earlier been an associate governor under

Balkatekin and Qaratekin, first at Anderabah and then at Balkh.

During most of the period from 344 until 384 the Governors of Khorasan were

members of the Simjurid family. Nasir al daulah Mohammed Simjuri 11 governed

Khorasan during most years from 344 until his death in 378 (Alptekin 349-503

Tash 367, 371-77). His son, Abu 'Ali Mohammed Simjuri 111 held the office of

Governor of Khorasan in 374 and from 378 until the advent of the Ghaznavids in

384. The names of these two Samanid governors of Khorasan appear on a number of

multiple dirhems as well as on most Nishapur dinars.

The Ghaznavid state was founded by Alptekin in 351. He was a Turkish

Commander of the Samanid army appointed Governor of Khorasan in 349 by his

sovereign 'Abd al Malik. When 'Abd al Malik died in 350 Alptekin was dispossessed

## of his offices by the new sovereign Mansur ibn Nuh and betook himself to Ghazni

® in S.E. Afghanistan where he created his own 'Ghaznavid' kingdom. Succeeding

Ghaznavid rulers achnowledged the sovereignty of the Samanids. Sebuktegin, a

former slave of Alptekin, ruled this Ghaznavid vassal state from 367 until 387

and made of it a powerful kingdom. In 384 the Samanid Nuh 11 called on his

Ghaznavid vassal to assist in quelling a rebellion led by the ex-chamberlain

Faiq and the Governor of Khorasan Abu 'Ali Mohammed Simjuri. Sebuktegin and his

son Mahmud, assisted by Mohammed ibn Farighun the governor of Juzjan-Balkh, duly

put down the rebellion and were rewarded by Nuh who bestowed the title Nasir

al daulah on Sebuktegin and elevated his son Mahmud to the Governorship of

Khorasan, giving him the title Sayf al daulah. During 384 both Sebuktegin and

Mahmud were campaigning in northern Afghanistan where coins record both names as

subjects of the sovereign Nuh. In 385 Sebuktegin retired to Herat, adding this

province to his Ghaznavid state. From this date Sebuktegin's coinage is restricted

to Herat (AH. 385, 386) plus his other Ghaznavid domains south of the Hindu Kush.

Mahmud, as Governor of Khorasan, remained in the north and continued coining in --- Nishapur and the north-east Afghan provinces.

In 387 Nuh 11 died and was succeeded by his son Mansur 11٠. Sebuktegin also

died but the succession was not peaceful for, while his elder son Mahmud was away

governing Khorasan one of Sebuktegin's younger sons Isma'il claimed the Ghaznavid

succession, During the rest of 387 and much of 388 Mahmud and Isma'il fought each

other. For a while Isma'il controlled territory north of the Hindu Kush and struck

multiple dirhems at Walwaliz in Tokharestan (388) but by the end of 388 Mahmud

was victorious. Having regained control of Tokharestan Mahmud struck multiple

dirhems at Anderabah (388) and he re-assumed his Governorship of Khorasan

(from Bektuzun who had been appointed in 387), striking dinars in this capacity

at Nishapur (388). Thus when the year 389 began Mahmud was both the Ghaznavid

sovereign and the Governor of Khorasan owing allegiance in both capacities to

his Samanid sovereign Mansur. In this capacity he struck dirhems at Balkh and

dinars at Nishapur during the early part of 389. During the course of this year

Mansur was murdered by Abu 'Ali Simjuri and Bektuzun and Mansur's younger brother

'Abd al Malik 11 was placed on the Samanid throne (Nishapur dinars of Bektuzun,

mid 389). Mahmud, hitherto a loyal subject of the Samanids now threw off his

allegiance to the new puppet and declared himself an independant ruler. Mahmud

now possessed a Ghaznavid kingdom that embraced virtually the whole of Afghanistan,

a kingdom whose northern frontier was the river Oxus. Whereas the Samanids had

never relinquished their allegiance to the caliph Al Ta'i who had been deposed in

381, Mahmud now recognised the reigning caliph Al Qadir (381-422) and was rewarded

by him with the title Yemin al daulah. Thus during the early part of 389 Sayf al

daulah Mahmud the Samanid subject, issued coins recording the names of the caliph

Al Ta'i and of his sovereign Mansur (Balkh, Nishapur) but during the later part of

the same year, 389, Yemin al daulah Mahmud the independant Ghaznavid sovereign

struck coins bearing only his own name and that of the caliph Al Qadir (Anderabah,

## Nishapur), This year also marks the penultimate issue of multiple dirhems. @

# SAMANID SILVER SHORTAGE

The existence of these multiple dirhems and the contemporary debasement of

all Samanid silver currency are two manifestations of the severe silver shortage

that began to affect the region in the early tenth century. The cause of the

silver shortage was massive outflow of silver along Khwarezmian-Viking trade

routes in the direction of Scandinavia. The Volga Bulghar kingdom on the middle

Volga formed an entrwepot where the traders of Khwarezm, a Samanid vassal state on

## the southern border of the Aral Sea, were well established. The Vikings (Varangians)

of Sweden, having established large trading communities at Novgorod and Kiev, also

founded outposts in Bulghar where they were noted by Ibn Fadlan who led an embassy

from the caliph Al Muktadir to the king of the Volga Bulghars in 309 (AD. 921).

During the years when hwarezmian-Viking trade flourished the Volga Bulghars also

issued their own dirhems (C.AH. 413-370) modelled on those of the Samanids.

The manning of this trade route during the period ¢.280 to 370 led to one of

the nost massive, if not the most important, translocations of coinage that has
## \| ee ee \|

occurred. As far back as 1848 Tornberg was able to record 134 hoards of moslem

coins found in Sweden alone and nearly all of these contained a preponderance of

Samanid dirhems. Since that time many other hoards containing large numbers of Sam-

anid dirhems have been reported from other Scandinavian countries, from Poland and

from Russia. The composition ofthese hoards is consistent. They usually contain

large numbers of Samanid dirhems associated with numerous dirhems struck by the

Omayyad and Abbasid caliphs that had previously ruled the region now controlled by

the Samanids. To these coins there tend to be added a scattering of dirhems struck by other contemporary moslem dynasties.

The Samanid silver mines of the Hindu Kush were flourishing during the tenth

century. There was extensive mining in the Wakhan valley of east Badakhshan and the

Panjhir silver mines in the south-west of this province were renowned at this period.

Further west mines in the mountains around Anderabah were producing a lot of silver

and there was substantial production still further west in the mountains between

## Gharjistan and Bamian. Even so there was an imbalance between prolific silver

© production in the mines and even more prolific export of silver to Scandinavia, The

resulting shortage led to the debasement of the the coinage and a decrease in the

numbers of new coins being struck at all mints outside the silver mining regions.

The multiple dirhem coinage now assumes a definite place for it was essentially the

coinage struck in the main Samanid silver mining region during a period when silver

was a particularly sought after commodity. So far as one can judge the aim was to

put the newly mined silver on the market rapidly. Such an impetus to coin the new

silver rapidly probably explains the opening of a number of new mints in Badakhshan

province which only functioned at this period and may also account for the high

denomination of the coins and such features as the lack of care in striking and the

rather careless engraving of some dies. It would also be consistent with the absence

of any requirement to fully refine the silver and the rather imprecise adherence to © a standard weight.

# SEQUENCE OF ISSUES

The first two issues of multiple dirhems were struck by Nasr 11 (301-331) and

bear no dates but they are inscribed with the names of local governors: Balkatekin

(320-326) and Qaratekin (326-330). Qaratekin's issue can be dated more precisely to

the years 326-329 since it also bears the name of the caliph Al Radi who died in

329. These two issues struck at the 'Fortress of Kishm', a garrison town in the

western part of Badakhshan province, inaugurated the multiple dirhem coinage,

By the end of Nasr ibn Ahmad's reign in 331 the coinage of Badakhshan province

had entirely converted from dirhems of normal fabric to these multiple dirhems.

The mint at the provincial capital, Badakhshan City, struck its last recorded normal

Girhems (Beled Badakhshan: var.) in 321 and was striking multiple dirhems (Kura

Padakhshan) from the reign of Nuh 1 ibn Nasr (331-343). Panjhir, the mint situated

in the chief silver mining centre of the province, struck normal dirhems until 9

with multiple dirhems appearing in the last years of Nasr ibn Ahmad's reign, 330-1. --- a em

Both normal and multiple dirhems were issued at Panjhir with the mint name

rendered in full as Al Ma'dan Panjhir (or Panj) and with the mint name shortened

to Al Ma'dan, literally the mining town'. The identification of Al Ma'dan with

Al Ma'dan Panjhir is clear in the case of multiple dirhems where coins of both

types are closely related and usually bear the name of the governor of Badakhshan

province in addition to that of his Samanid sovereign, It is likely, however,

that the few normal dirhems with the mint name Ma'dan struck during the years 533,

340 and 341, after Panjhir had already commenced issuing multiple dirhems, were

emitted from one of the other Samanid mining towns such as Tashkent (Ma'dan al Shash).

The multiple dirhem coinage was, for the next 60 years, to be the only form

of coinage struck in Badakhshan province. In addition to Kishm, Ma'dan Panjhir and

Kura Badakhshan, several minor mints were also opened during the reign of Nuh ibn

Nasr and all these continued to function until the time of his grande@m Nuh 11 ibn

## Mansur (365-387).

Until 365 Tokharestan province retained the standard coinage and issued a

Samenid dirhems that frequently recorded the names of the governors. Then in 366

Anderabah, along with the two less active mints in Tokharestan, Walwaliz and Tayakan,

adopted the multiple dirhem fabric for coinage and struck these alone until a final

issue in 389, The Anderabah mint coined dated multiple dirhems fairly continuously,

striking a total of 16 issues during the period 366 to 389. Walwaliz (370, 388) and Tayakan (376) were much less active.

Both Gharjistan and Bamian issued scarce dirhems of normal fabric around 300

and a later issue from Bamian is dated either 306, 316 or 326, Therafter a small

number of multiple dirhems were struck at both mints from 327 until the time of

Nuh 11. The earlier coins are dated but from the time of Mansur ibn Nuh (350-365)

they bear the mint name only. Some coins from Bamian acknowledge the authority of

the Shahr (sic.) of Bamian ard one of the issues from Gharjistan names the Shar

## who was governing at the time of Mansur as 'Shahr Amir Nuh, king and defender of al®

# METROLOGY

These multiple dirhems are a group of silver coins that weigh about four

times as much as normal dirhems and have a diameter about twice as great, The

weights of some 400 multiple dirhems present a clear picture. Those struck in

Badakhshan province weigh 12 mahal grammes while those from Tokharestan weigh

11 2 1.0 grammes (cited in terms of the modal coin weight and the weight range

that includes 50% of recorded coin weights). The distribution of coins weights

showed progrssive attenuation on either side of this peak to extreme weights of

6 and 21 grammes. Breekdown of these figures for Badakhshan province showed that

the same weight standard was used at all mints and that it remained constant from

the time of Nuh 1 until the end of Nuh 11's coinage in 384. At either end of these time limits coins tend to be lighter.

Although it is apparent that multiple dirhems were struck to a definite weirht

standard of approximately 12 grammes it is equally apparent that the coins do not --- ~ 7 ~

adhere very closely to their standard weight. Examination of the coins shows that

weight variation was, for the most part, quite random with coins of the same issue

differing by as much as two-fold in their weights. One may judge that such

fluctuation in coin weight would not have been permitted unless the coins only

possessed a token value, In practice all the silver coinage struck throughout the

Samanid realm appears to have assumed a token value during the period under

discussion. Just as the multiple dirhems show significant debasement of their

silver so contemporary normal dirhems struck both north and south of the Oxus

also show debasement of comparable dgree and co-incidentally tend to fluctuate in

weight. Hennequin quotes weights of up to 6 grammes for normal dirhems of this

period and the weights of the author's ten Balkh dirhems (AH. 365-394) range from

2.9 to 5.3 grammes, Yet because these somewhat heavier dirhems are moderately

debased one can safely conclude that their intrinsic value was no greater than

the value of normal undebased dirhems struck during a slightly earlier period at

a constant weight close to 3 grammes. The slightly heavier debased dirhems of the

340's to 380's circulated alongside earlier undebased dirhems at a presumably

equal value and it is not unlikely that the multiple dirhems possessed a token ° value of four dirhems.

I am grateful to a number of persons who have provided information about

multiple dirhems in their possession, The substantial amount of information now

in hand about these multiple dirhems and the context in which they were issued

can only be summarised within the limits of an information sheet. It is proposed

to publish the full text and catalogue with references and photographs as a book in the autum. June

## Type KB 16 Type M 1 Type KS 1 --- Map I. Afghanistan

land above 6,000 ft. WS sland above 13,000 ft. A= Anderabah, Andijaragh

B - Balkh, Bamian, Bokhara F - Faizabad (Kura Badakhshan), Farwan G = Ghazni

GH - Gharjistan H - Herat J - Jirm K - Kabul, Kandahar, Karan, Kishe M - Merv, Meshad

N - Nishapur P + Panshir, Peshawar Q = Qunduz (Walwaliz) rf S - Samarkand " T - Tashkent, Tayakan Z - Zebak 5 دوي

## د 3ك وايايم

Map II. N.E. Afghan provinces in the 10th. century AD. Gharjistan,Bamian
Distibution of miltiple dirhems and their issues by mints and resigns.

# A) BADAKHSRAN PROVINCE

Coins naming governors of the north-east Afghan provinces.

| Tokherestan | Badakhshan |  |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Kabul valley | Xhuttal |  |
| Ma'dan | Kishm | Jizm |
| Zebax |?Karan | No كماد‎ |
| Badekhshen | Panshir |  |

| jee | ٠ |
|:--- | ---: |
| \\|-- |  |
|  |  |
| -- |  |
| Qaratekin |  |
| Al Harith |  |
| Al Herith |  |
| Nuh 1 |  |
| 331-343 |  |
| 21(3 |  |
| 21(8 |  |
| 4(3) | (1)1١ |

Mansur 1 350-365 20(7 20(3 5(3) \| -- $$ = $$ 314, 317 285, 292 Nuh 11 365-384 (-387) 15(8) \| 7(3) \| 2(2) mR a 38(1) \|-- 318, 319 293, 294 + Al Tati 3(1) 16(6 6(3) $$ |= $$ Ql) ~- + Al Tati & Al  ١ 5! له‎ Harith ibn Harb \|1 2. يك‎ 10  'ius 55(6) (5)\_\| 32(2) (2) \| 21(2) 7(1) Belkatekin Belkatekin Balxatekin Balkatekin itn Ahmad Ae سم‎ (in عب‎ 1)1( 1(1) 3-3 oe 3(1) 320, 323 + Harb BD (320-6) 320, 323 310, 312 cca tig Sayf \| 8 -\_ - - o  - - aa  a" wai 'Genin) $$ = $$ $$ = $$ $$ = $$ $$ = $$ $$ =. $$ $$ ==, $$ - - Yusuf  Yusuf oer 243(27) 2 180(32) 35)16( 3(2) 12)4( 35(6) 77(3) \_ 10(2) 323, 324

Note: Number of coins (number of issues) Belkatekin Balkatekin - TOKHARESTAN PROVINCE  A ge Anderabah Walwalis \| Tayakan 326.

Nuh 11 26(20) 1(1) (1) Belketekin Sebi 2(2) ie 325, 326 Mahmud (Sayf al daula) 15(4 $$ = $$ Qaratekin Qaratekin Qaratekin Tema'il 388 (in Khorasan) \| ~~ 1(1) 326, 527 326, 330 RD )326-9( / Mahiud (Yemin al daula) 111(1) "- \| سه‎ \} Yusuf \| Total 154(16) 2(2) 1(1)

| Al Harith | Ahmad |
|:--- |:--- |
| ibn Sahlan | ibm Herb |

Bamian Gharjistan ND (331-43) \| 4 Nasr 11 '101 ae Mohammed Maktuz Ahmad Buh 1 1(2 ae ibn ibn Earb ibn Mansur 1 3(2 6(2) Farighun 344, 347 Ja'far Nuh 11 337, 340 f1.¢.340 Total 6(2 Qatekin Alptekin - - ee  $$ = $$ Bid, 342 \| 347 Badakhshan province: 595 coins of 92 issues from 8 rints (7 + no mint name) a nae 000

Tokharestan province: 157 coins of 19 issues fron 3 mints ibn ibn Harb Cha: Qatakin \| 359, 360 \| ND (350-65) \| CHAZNAVIDS Fe gage ad tjistan province + 12 coins of 7 issues from 2 mints 362, 364 ' 351 أ‎ Nuh Total 764 coins of 116 issues from 13 mints, AH. 320/6 to 394 كفيو \| فنك‎ ND (350-65)

329 of the 764 coins belong to 5 common issues (AN 16, KB 16, KB 20, M 25 and M 26) ttm ibn The total of 764 coins should be increased by about 1% to include barbarous copies and by a Farigoun \| Maktus further 3 to 5% to include unattributable coins with stylised obverse legends (normel rev. types\}

Mchamned ibn 366, 370 Farighun + Paig Sahlen BD (365-84) Al Harith ibn ibn Earb \| Maktum + Harb i Faig 367, 368 ND (365-84) \| \| \| 369, 370 ' 374, 378

\| Balketekin \| ND (384) Hard Shahr Peshid! / ® 368, 389 ©. ND (384) £1,369
Badekhshen province 1.  KURA BADAKESHAN $$ = 12< $$

OBVERSE FIELD: 3 line Kali MARCINS و‎ Obv. inner - Biamillah Rey. = Koran IX, 33 7 ةاءلااك هرحهؤسالا هلكبرشال‎ Ubv, outer - Rone

Type Caliph Obv. field Bismillah Around Obv. type Rev. field Around Rev, type Governor (ending) J 5S Ry NUH XI ibn NASR 331 ~ 343 لله‎ سم‎ J ° KB 1 Al Harith $$ = $$ 39> FB) مان قن‎ oASLXI all ot وسو الله و"‎ eo

## KB3

Al Muti!. 8S الارهم‎ wy برحنب‎ ots ele عت‎ 9 Al Haritn b Harb w Lins \> oy gost

J MANSUR I ibn HUH 350 - 365 ax. or he ei ol ° Al Harith pears " soo ون‎ v9 اباكأ لله‎ - - KB 4  1 هللا 0 كرحلا‎ youu © ©

## KB 9

Mohammed oA Su 0 كمد جد جوابا ب 5 بن حرب الحرثت‎ Al Harith b Harb THY WH

# NUH II ibn MANSUR 365 - 384 $$ (= 567(* $$

## لله‎

'KB 12 Mohammed on " اكسل 0...تردع نيد + \|الجرنت‎ \_- e

## Al Harith b Harb نوع- بن روحنو‎

## لله‎ د

فيه ماده عد ل‎ KB 15 Al Tati ---. مصممه‎ gros هللاب‎ XI o 5  ١ رز \[ودرب‎ - Rarith  ey yo \| aU إلطابع‎ )JOro نوع بن‎ KB 16 Al Tati. " « - - - رشوا الله‎ Povo ع لايفا‎ Al Harith 5 Harb للب‎ q Ut! ميف شيف!ٍ ملولا‎ KB 20 Al Tati $$ = $$ ".قرتشملا »للاوبر‎. o م‎ " Wali Mohammed PSO Al Harith b Harb

## SEBUKTEGIM (in Khorasan)

## KB 21 Al Harith

oo " gasssittg الاباللك‎ - و دودنم اثله‎. °.

MAFMUD ibn SEBUKTEGIN $$ 384 = 569 $$ (Sayf al deulah) رلولا‎ ad لله‎ KD 22 ali (11: المشرق ربرلطه " ا مهمل \*\* ‎ at Sy ° ° © لذو ده‎ Sew plue- 11 >» Uz Breall \* efter 504 Nuhts waltiple @irhema record ه‎ Chasnavid govcrnor \*\*Wali Mohammed (Abu 'Ali) defeated by Mahmud in 384, Od obv. type

Batsichsiian province 2.  MA'DAN PANSHIR ~ i136

OBVE RSE PIELD: 3 line Kalima MARGINS: Cov. inner ~ Bismillah Rev, + Koran ik, 7 ALK الله و حده‎ Kiall¥ Obv. outer ~ Koran XXX, 7-4

Type Caliph Obv. field Bismillah Around Obv, type Rev. field Around Rev. type Coverner (ending)

# BRASR I ibn AHMAD 301 ~ 331 RUH I ibn NASR 331 هس‎ 343

١ aU M4 Al Harith b Harb ir " بن حرب ثرحلا‎ obi dou \| a a

## M68 Al Harith b Hard ثرحاا. 5 0 عم‎ yaw, ee

# MANSUR I ibn NUH 350 - 365

رء‎ +o) \| ِ 3 نه حرب ثرحلا‎ reso 0 كر‎ Ail Harith b Hard 9 ينه‎ ee jy ببنو 1 الله بها‎ y - - o Ne IZ itm MANSU!: 365 ~ 584 )- 387)

## M13

Hami Moharcred -  " ose sols pose AST yes M17. Mohammed RE nt رز‎ we \>MoSl > a بن رومدم‎ ty " " $$ = $$ Al Harith b Harb FOUTS e 5-5 M23 Al Tats " ثرحلا‎ usw vos op Tw, i Al Harith © Harb للم‎ yw ld) RS? wy Moll بن روصتم ' تو كل‎ THY A M 25 " $$ = $$: دو‎ sass. att Sen, لابقا‎ Pm ~ سل‎ he a a ees. seis - - Sy wold mule wee  - - ami  Mohanmne 7 ١ Al arith b Herb عوك سجرب‎ (in Khorasan) 29: a) Sis, BON we
# ic ee MO ne مجع‎. 3( 2506 كه‎ Badakhshan province

OBVERSE FIELD: 3 line Kalima MARGINS 1 Obv. inner - Bismillah Rev. «= Koran IX, 33 هلكيرتتب‎ 5 org اكاهلااك الله‎ Obv. outer - Koran XXX, 3-4

FIRST SERIES: Bismilleh - In the name of Cod this dirhem was approved at the fortress (or the encampment) of Kishm

## peed (GS (سراء‎ ay الدرهم‎ 158 soy نسم لله‎

Type Caliph Obv. field Bismillah Around Obv, type Rev. field Acound Rev. type Governor (ending)

NASR II ibm AHMAD - - to.٠ ثني هو ‎.٠ >>2 9 الله‎ J ببسو‎ a KS 1 Balkatekin plo gy بو‎. aie et جح‎ ل ودبم ١ ‎ Qaratekin: إثرا قي لله‎

بن احسح‎ so! NUH I itn 1458 331 - 343 قرا تكين‎

## pat) ' Ks 3 ييا >> بها يها هه‎ - - -  a Jou - - ol

# MANSUR I ibn NUH 350 - 5

## KS " الدب " لي‎. J $$ = = $$ Tne Jao

# NUH II ibn MANSUR $$ 365 = 384 $$ )- 387)

ce KS 5 Hemi Mohammed " " " - - -  wt sa gl >oX? OY, دمن‎

dh ee Jjgoo يك‎ TY:4 KS 6 Mohammed فعسم يما‎ \> pw هه $$ = $$ الى ييا‎.-

## KS

Al Tati " " - - - ساروسسر‎  \>es0 افمال‎. - - ~ r Al Hearith b Harb a الطايو‎ jxO° cH Cy

## بن حرب‎ cy pall SECOND SERTES +s Normal biamilleh

## WUH I

4bn WASR 331 - 343 لذه‎ KS 10 AY Mutit لمن‎ p pads سراد‎ - - -  ou) yoo) Peo Bedaryhshan province 4. 101

OPVERSE FIELD: 3 line Kalima MARGINS: Obv, inner ~ Bismillah Rev. - Koran IX, 33 ءهدحومللا 6كرهلكيرش‎ AIAIX ْ Obv. outex = Koran XXX, 3-4

Type Caliph Otv. field Bismillah Around Obv. type Rev. field Around Rev. type Governor (ending)

NUH I ibn 331 ~ 343 5 قرشملا‎  ١ هج مهن‎. JR Al Hariih b Harb -- بن حرب ثرحلا‎ - - ~  mt هووسر‎ a لوج ين دصر‎

NUH IZ 4bn MANSUR $$ 365 = 384 $$ )- 387) © " لل‎ " " " $$ = $$ tte " ل‎ JIM بن‎ © 91

# 5) NO MINT NAME SURI. itm WH ow

\* 3\\0 ° uu) J mi NO 2\* $$ w= $$ 56  ٠ - - - sae  UL يدي‎ - - Joico. THY,

NUH II ibn MANSUR 365 ~ 384 $$ (= 387)داكا‎ $$ oe NO 3% -~ حده‎ 9 ail! جيهي‎ Te يدى‎ = - - ee  ١ 53  aS, ك شد‎

\* Double 3:65 معن‎ issue vith Koren IX, 3) قغ‎ maxgin on both sides, 557119833 legends on side catologued as obvercc but normal literate coin type on the pther side. cfr.?Karen.

lseroN,ylo  dlcif  3(  enil  )amilaK  dna  olgnis.vbo  nigraw  neroK(,XXX.)4-3  lawroF,ver  nigram  naroK(,XI.)33  eelbmeseR  aruF ‏hahkadaL عع

# 6) ZEBAK

OBVERSE FIELD 1: 3 line Kalima MARGINS: Obv, inner ~ Bismilleh (contracted) Sok poy tide للك شرب‎ pin elightly contracted Obv. outer - Koran XXX, 3-4 (contracted) AL, yo كد‎ omg a) 5 Rev. - Koran IX, 33 (fully literate)

# RUH 11 MANSY 365 ~ 364 (~387)

# a لطتو لق لبط‎

## لواح بن روكلم‎

د طة‎ AY Dats " " o 53 للكت د‎ Soa, 52 اكبيال‎ Ae Al Hearith b Harb Ue ttt / MC ‏YT »دور $$ -- = $$ 5 د ردلاث ين درب B2  4 $$ = $$ dab - -  5 ‏a
# 4D

# AN

# AN 14

# AN 16 Badakhshan province OBVERSE PIELD ¢« 3 line Kalime

# 7) TKARAN MARGINS ¢ Obv. inner ~ Biemillah (stylised) ‏dasarp \| لللات ضور dm ‏adV © 209 كارت

ycer ‏otc هذا ‏tesmem بكا wg sell calla marked 2,جتان‎ outer ~ Koran XXX, 4 (etylisea) > SAS "سوسس‎ Rte te Rev. ~ Koren IX, 33 (fully literate)

م0811‎ Obv. fiel@ Bismillah Around Bboy. type Rev. field Around Rev, type Governor (ending) NUH I ibn 331 ~ 343

>ore.ا ء‎ at كارت يكذ‎ Le 8 الله‎ isae 3, ab Gi ya بن‎ ty

# MANSUR I itn HUH 350 ~ 365

## \>-o.

Al Harith b Harb " " " سعدا لنب بن‎ avi راود‎ oo 0 بن تواج‎

# NUH II itn MANSUR 365 ه‎ 364 )- 387) AY) " " " اندم‎ yay " so? بن‎ TD

## Al Tati

\_- « ©.- لامقا محمد ##بسييا) الله‎ ie Al Harith b Harb إلطا بو ذلك‎ نوج بن متدمور‎

Town in Khutiai psuvince controlled by the governor of Badakhshan OBVERSE FIELD: 3 line Kalima

## AS الله حده سر‎ 41م‎ 1 sj اند دجرع كره‎ Al Herith b Hard Harh Harb 9 بها‎ Tokhereetan province

OSVERSE FIELD s 3 line Kalima - all except AN 4  AS.) % الله وحده‎ KIDX - type  AN 4

MARGINS + Obv. inner ~ Bismillah (first part contracted) باند بجرع كرك‎

## ‏llay بن حرب

# 10) ANDIJARAGH

Obv. outer - Koran XXX, 3-4 (slightly contracted) - Koran IX, 33 (fully literate) 365 - 384 $$ (= 387) $$ » Rev.

# NUH II itm MANSUR

# ele حرب‎ lg".‏

## ‏exo\> رسو( الله

## نوج بن رحلاث روصدعو بنك حدرب SERUKTEGIN (in Khorasan)

# 11) ANDERABAH sv ١ Jgowy Sisim aro) we MARGINSs Obv. inner - Bisaillah

Obv. outer =~ until AH. 368 OL Siz ad شريك‎ Bors و‎ Soll 569 & 370 from 37x & 374

## 7 ابقال 1 Koran XXX, 5-4 not cited by Markoff no outer warginal legend

Rev. =~ except AH.374 1 Koren IX, 54-5 AH. 374: Koran LAV, 3

Caliph Obv. 21614 Bismillah Around Obv, type Rev. field Around Rev. type Governor (ending)

Date NUH II ftm MANSUR 365 ~ 384 (~387) 2 لبه‎ pose تالهس بن‎ ain lyst xo

# ra I en a "Sieg 9 تو كل بكفو‎

##: ذلك‎ ل 1م‎ te نندت‎ opty aI? bos - - PFs? Jn

## Sehlan b Mektum

\| بن 390كه‎ cae ينك مات و‎ ea د‎ oy Sahlen b Maktoum me... انح‎ gL " - - ltt دو‎  vow 37x PSSo wy wey -s Ss 3903 © wes " 5 هتياردنا نيفين‎ HS, IS wee 9 اتلك زع‎ sow و‎ oY) Stoll. ot 5 ابو مدحمور‎ Pius.ننى هباردنا‎  ١ ذلبه‎ pal 378 سبهلات بن موتكم‎ wi sets me uel Pile ee eee للك الاصبر = و »سداهيتات‎ it sche نوع بن‎ (4» Fhoreean) bs

\_ dae gis م: تياردتا‎ Ay Tots aS 5 it Ok Reams ai ذلك دمدلا ا‎ wiglh 9 ىنيكتكبس‎ ws of

MAL.UD dtm SEBUKTIGIN 484 - 389 (Sayf al daulah)

aa الس حك‎ gis wis ° ° ه‎ ° etry) Pou) ° ° 2.85 asco نوج بن‎ lot 9 ديس‎ m4 So الله‎ rite pluc ~ > HL «سبيف الح ولك‎ plus - 7 الله‎ t,o 9 Al Tally 51 إلطا‎ ty الحا باكا تكين هداردنا‎ - - 3-2  aut PP \>\<ss ws ish u2 bit $$ = $$ Sate -  3 رمد حي: ب‎ 2.٠ هد‎ - - Pe an  Lib تم‎ vad dash 'Tei

> ه.سو‎ MAHMUD dtm SEBUKTFCIN 389 ~ 420 (Yemin al daulah)

## Al Csdir

Wut aN Pees SE wiSG ولكا‎ \> Yat 5 إى أ‎ ~ Jac الحاجى‎ Balkatexin 0-5-0 $$ =o $$ Gon (الشناء‎ chain Oy ف‎ و عحدأن ااملنى Mate Kae -
## هلللا ضرب \> لدن؛‎

# © --- '° Tokharestan province 12.  WALWALIZ

٠ OBVFRSE FIFLD: 3 line Kalima MARGINS: Obv. inner - Bismillak  Rev, - Koran IX, 33 هكاكيرش‎ KR orr\>gal «الوالا‎ Obv. outer - Koran XXX, 3-4

Type Celiph Obv. field Bismillah Around Obv, type Rev. field Around Rev. type Governor (ending) Date NUH 11 dtm MANSUR 365 ~ 384 (~ 387)

## \>

Ls زيلبا ول و ‎ Wl اذ‎ ele sitio الله كت 5 8 سق‎ Somes - - 4 ģ ووحْنم د‎ Ot 9

## ISMA'IL 388

(in Khorasan) ds pat انلق‎ 354. Doro:,. 3 سه‎ ao 1 Be site Just digs! كرمان و اس روصنم بن ك4 للك لك‎ 388 شميديك‎ \| We ينف ليسميتتشسا زا و ثما نين‎

## كر

الدربت‎ 13( 'TAYAKAN OBVERSE FIELD: 3 line Kalima MARGINSs Obv. inner ~ Biemillah (seaonteat ww و بلفيدت‎ uu 9 سنت‎ الك ودده ل هلكيرشب‎ Sadik Obv. outer - Bismillah (first half) هنس ģ تاّمي ‎ lb» مهردلا اذه برخ هللا مسي ‎ Rev. - Koran IX, 53-4

# NUH II itm MANSUR 365 - 364 )- 387) 1

376 نوع بن رومتم‎ Gharjistan province 14.  BAMIYAN (General type description as Ma'dan Panshix

NASR II ibn AHMAD $$ 301 = 331 $$ oi at i de $$ = $$ gun wheb ف‎ \_- ois\} Fosu 4 هللاب‎ ob eww perl تب رصحت ‎  ١: NU I dtm NASR 331 - 343 ou

iu بو باميات‎ 41 Mutteci ee اا ب‎ oN ~ - - -~  - ققد‎  - - ~  6 331 هلابوظتملا‎ ets» oat

## د فا و امتلت بده‎ MANSUR I itm 350 - 365 ققد‎

# DA 4 Ham Shahr

a whe gb بو اط بركه ويمن شهر‎ ٍ a Sb. ~ بن نوج‎

15( GHARJISTAN (General type description as Kura Bedakhshan\| MANSUR I ibn NUH 350 ~ 365 للك‎

## Fy

bey Gi 2 Shahy Amir Nuh عكروك يسسشسه‎ Ssh. حا‎ rey) هللاب‎ vo, -. defenier of all

| ANJ)!RABAH WALWALIZ TAYAKAN) | KURA |  |  |
| ---: | ---: |:--- |:--- |
|?KARAN | GHARJISTAN BAMIAN | ANDIJARAGH KHUTTAL | FARWAN |
| 314,315 | 514 |  |  |
| 316,317 | 316,317 |  |  |
| 320,321 | 520 |  |  |
| 522,523 | 322,323 |  |  |
| 324,325 | 4 |  |  |
| 426,527 | 326 |  |  |
| 331-43 \\\_ | 331-43 ~~ |  |  |

## Ze

\| 344 a Pima ba =i د‎ 346,347 \| 346,347  ١ ae ek athe \> PS

##,

~ 352,353 \| 352 i ad Pi PS, Pa Pa -  om. -- ta 355 ae a ig ee Pe ip ae 5 يو‎ 3 es 320 ا‎ 340 a 2 يي بي‎

# 2 160 N يد‎ Pe ( ا‎ ie 5368 ed a3 ( 75 - - oe

# L370(1). 370(1

| ee | ١ |
| ---: | ---: |
| ١1 | ١ |

SS ' et mae +, Ses 2 ML 59 2 Bt bes sie: 394(1) 0 << SS 2-5-7. ty ie ae Bt Pe FE:: nail Distributicn of wuitiple divhems cross-hatched. FARWAN= only دنا‎ Ghagnavid iecucs cited, coine are common tut dates often off flan, & 2118©: of other ةعخمم‎ sre kmown \| 'WSPIRAg \\eint nase Matdan biaint naze includes Panchir. (x) = Number of coin tyres per date,