# MAY 1979

# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

# INFORMATION SHEET NO, 21

# THE COPPER DOITS OF BANJARMASIN c.1789-1817 F, Pridmore

# INTRODUCTION

When preparing the catalogue for British possessions in Asia (1) a reference was found indicating that coins were issued with the consent of

the British Administration of Java and struck by their resident in Banjarmasin, Borneo. The Agentswas Alexander Hare and while Hare had considerable dealings with the Sultan of Banjarmasin extending back to 1808, the variety of the coins attributed to the State suggested a much longer period of issue than the brief British Administration of 1811-1816,

Despite a remarkable range in design only one Banjarmasin coin type is listed in present day standard catalogues of World Coins, although a Dutch numismatist, J.P. Moquette, published a study of the series complete with seven plates depicting 101 specimens, Unfortunately, the article was printed in a rather inaccessible Journal and written in Dutch (2) but it was felt that a re-listing of the coins would perhaps be of some interest to readers.

# BANJARMAS IN

Banjarmasin was a Sultanate covering a large area of the southerly part of the island of Borneo and the town and seaport of Banjarmasin was built on both sides of the Martapura river. From the beginning of the 17th

century various relationships were established between the State and Euro peans (Portuguese, Dutch and English). The English East India Company visited Borneo in 1609 and by 1698 had established a trading post at Banjarmasin, but were compelled to withdraw about 1733 after the Sultan had granted a trading monopoly to the Dutch. In 1787 the Sultan became a vassal of the Dutch but the political upheaval in Europe and the election

of Leuis Napoleon as King of Holland in 1806 resulted in the withdrawal of the Dutch from Borneo in 1809.

In 1811 Dutch interests in the Malay Archipelago passed to the British and in 1812, in response to a plea from the Sultan for assistance to suppress lewlessness and piracy, the Lieutenant-Governor of Java (Sir Stamford Raffles) sent an agent to Banjarmasin as Resident and Commissioner for Borneo. The agent was Alexander Hare, who in October 1812, obtained from the Sultan

a personal grant of about 1,400 square miles of land in the province of Maluka and founded his own sovereign state,

Under the terms of a Convention signed in London on the 13th August, 1814, Java and Borneo were returned to the Dutch, This was accomplished in 1816 and on the 1st January,'1817, the Dutch resumed their relationship with Banjarmasin. Alexander Hare was evicted from Maluka a short time later. Following a revolt in 1859 the Sultanate of Banjarmasin was abolished by the Dutch Indies Government and was formed into southern and eastern divisions

in 1860, when Banjarmasin became the capital and seaport of Dutch Borneo,
# COINS

The earliest listing of the coins issued by Banjarmasin was included in "Notes on the Netherlands Indies Coins" by J.S. van Coevorden and published in the Journal Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal, Land en Volkenkunde Batavia, 1858. Three specimens are described ( Nos. 4-3) and bear the name of the State is their design. Co@vorden records thate..... "During my stay at Banjarmasin and also later, I was informed by reliable persons, among whom were the helpful Sayd Hasan and his son Sayd Aloewi, who comiunicated to me that these doits were issued with the consent of the British Interim Government of 1811 and were struck by Alexander Hare, who was, at that time, the Resident of the south and east coasts of Borneo, With regard to the figures occurring on the coins, I can give no satisfactory explanation",

The listing then continues with descriptions of an un-named but associated series of native minted copper doits to which he comnments:"Regarding the origin of the doits recorded under Nos. 4 to 15, I could not obtain any information based on written or printed documents. Some reliable old colonial servants, amongst them the Indies Antiquary Wardenaar and some very old native chiefs of prominent birth and rank, maintain that these doits were still abundant in circulation at the end of the last and at the beginning of the present century and were struck by or in the name of the

then Princesof Java to provide copper coins to end or prevent a shortage which now and then existed,"

Coevorden's "Notes" ended with the remarks - "to be continued", There was no continuation in the Journal. Any further descriptions were incorporated in the work of 8. Netscher and J.A. van der Chijs, De Munten van Nederlandsch Indie, Batavia, 1863.

Netscher and van der Chijs only illustrate and describe two coins of Banjarmasin, Later, on Page 213 of tneir work, they include a few native "False" doits but did not relate them to Banjarmasin and simply introduced them as being more or less curiosities of the general coinage of the area,

The next record was in the great work by Professor H.C. Millies, Recherches sur les Monnaies Indigenes de L'Archipel Indien et de la Peninsule Malaie, La Haye, 1871. He records that the coins are more or less crude imitations of the doits of the Dutch East India Company, bearing on the obverse the name of the state of Banjarmasin written in the Malay

characters within a crowned shield and on the reverse, the Dutch Company's o V c mark and badly executed date numerals. However, two types of reverse were observed by Millies and this second type induced him to "believe that we must attribute to Banjarmasin at least one other type and probably several obscure kinds of coins in copper, more or less imitating the doits of the Dutch Company".

In attempting to determine the period of issue of Banjarmasin coins, Millies, in a footnote, cites a letter written by Raffles dated Malacca 31st January, 1811, which refers to conditions in the state. It records that the Governor of the Dutch Colonies, Marshal Daendals, had objected

strongly to the opposition of the people in the interior of Banjarmasin against the admission of a (Dutch) copper currency he was trying to force into circulation and that the Banjarese people themselves had struck coins.

From the evidence of the imitated dates show on the o V c reverse design on the Banjarmasin coins, Millies put the date of their introduction to about the year 1789. They would certainly have continued in use until the Dutch returned to power there in 1817 or a little later.
## a,

Fonrobert (3) under his catalogue numbers 869 to 878, records ten coins of Banjarmasin. Particularly interesting are his numbers 869-871:

6. Rupie. Auf einer spanischen G. Cuarta de Onza ( = 4 Pesos) unter Philipp V, 1740 gepragt, ist vor demGesicht ein Stempel mit a (Bandscher(\{masin) / eingepragt). Mill.S.56.

Rupie.Auf einem Utrechter Gulden der Westind\_ischen Kompagnie

gleicher Gegenstempel. 314 m/m. 81 (Gegenstempel E\>).

871 i Rupie. Auf einem Utrechter 2 Gulden der Westindischen Kompagnie gleicher Gegenstempel. 23 m/m, 8172,,

Fonrobert gives no date for Nos. 870/871 but they are the silver guilders and + guilder struck for the Dutch West Indies Company at Utrecht in 1794. How coins struck for another Company and intended for the West Indies could reach Banjarmasin in the East Indies and be countermarked for local circulation is not understood, The writer has not observed any article or observation dealing with these (unique?) coins, The countermark is listed by W.D. Craig, Coins of the World 1750-1850, without comment. The remaining seven coins are copper doits (listed by Fonrobert as kepings) و‎ of which Nos. 872 to 876 bear the name of the state and o V c reverses, No. 877 is the crowned shield type with the letters C E V I (= English

United East India Company and is Moquette No. 54). No. 878 has the talismanic numeral type reverse (of Moquette No. 11).

In 1896 a catalogue of the Numismatic Collection in the Batavia Museum was prepared by J.A. van der Chijs (4), but apart from listing a few Specimens which are referenced to Netscher and van der Chijs or Millies numbers, no further information was disclosed. It was not until the detailed study by J.P. Moquette was published in 1906 that the series was finally placed upon a sound footing.

The original intention was to attempt to re-catalogue and arrange the series by their main types established by Moquette, but since his study and attributions are virtually unknown to present day collectors, such a listing would not do justice to his research, It was therefore decided to reproduce his seven plates and repeat his remarks concerning the relation-=-

ship between the several un=-named varieties which enabled him to bring order into this obscure series of native minted copper doits,

The remarks include references to coins illustrated in the works of Netscher and van der Chijs (1863) and Millies (1871) and these coins have been included on an additional Plate VIII. At Apnendix I is a loose translated listing of native minted doits first published by Coevorden in 1858. This is especially interesting because a number of the pieces recorded by Coevorden do not appear in Moquette's article as varieties

although their main types are recorded by him,

The coins are all struck in copper and as already noted, their designs imitate the familiar Dutch doits commonly circulating in the area at the end of the 18th and at the beginning of the 19th century. Some rarer pieces bear an imitation of the English East India Company's bale mark or the Scales/Adil design found on the copper coins of the English East India Company's Bombay Presidency series,

Sizes vary from 20 to 23mm with some rare specimens of 15.5 to 16mm, Weights vary from 1.35 to 2.50 grammes (20.8 to 38.6 grains) but the

average weight is around 1.73 grammes (26.7 grains).

# eee
# MOQUETTE'S COMMENTS ON THE PLATES

A translated and edited version of the remarks on the native minted copper doits attributed to Banjarmasin, Borneo, by J.P. Moquette IETS OVER DE MUNTEN VAN BANDJARMASIN EN MALOEKA with seven plates. Batavia, 1906.

Plate I, 1 to 12, Plate II 14, 2), Plate VII, A.B& OC.

## These all carry the inscription مسرينى‎

ay (Banjarmasin) and proof of their origin is superfluous. Plate I, 13. Plate VII. 81.

This type was attributed by Millies (Nos. 272 to 274) to Banjarmasin because of the similarity of the reverse to his No. 271 (Moquette No. cee By comparing several specimens, the following reading was obtained by Moquette:

## wy ee

Note: Moquette does not translate the bottom rare line but Millies on page 168 of his ae work discusses the CcoinS...ee.

"Unfortunetely in the first type, of which we have only been able to see a few examples, not one was quite complete and distinct. The obverse bears a shield surmounted by a kind of crown and has on the two sides the Arabic figures Y'\\1- \\V\_ or 31 - 17. The shield is divided by a cross into four quarters which bear the Arabic figures disposed thus: Orjm! $$ or S$2(3! $$. ee" The reverse bears three lines of figures of which the first seems defective upon all ithe samples I have seen, In comparing three coins, I believe I can see م سوسم ن سر‎ the last line with iw at the bottom, gives a good

vey indication of the date 1222 (1807/8). (P1.XXV, Nos.272-274). A fourth example appears to bear different figures, but they are not clear. We do not know what to make of these mysterious figures and it is certainly the

only coinage stamped in this singular fashion, but the use of this hidden writing or of these talisman like figures appears to have been quite wide- spread formerly in Banjarmasin,"

Millies is quite definite that the last line was the usual word sanat year and his illustration No. 272 certainly supvorts such a reading. - This

coin type, as Millies remarked, is clearly dated year 1222 or AD 1807-1808, Plate JT. 24.

Inscription reversed (mirror script) and evidently from the same dies as Millies No. 269. It is also struck over a native copy of a Zeeland type doit. Plate I. 12 and 12a

Both have the same reverse( an ornamental V and leaf pattern) and struck from the same die, On 12a, the inscription BF? زمن‎ Zaman murah (= Bargain time) is thus from Banjarmasin. Plate 11. 14,15,15a,16,17 and

An important 52566031262. The reverse shows an anchor like sign and the numerals 181, a grouping which occurs in the same or another form on other

coins, This anchor sign, more or less pronounced, is found on 15, 15a, 16 and 25, The reverse of No. 16 is a slavish copy of No. 14 but the obverse, with small differences, agrees with that on No. 17. No. 25 has on the

obverse the arms of Holland and its connection with Nos. 14-17 is unmistakeable,. --- Plate 11. 18 and 19

Nos. 18 and 19 are connected to each other through their reverses, although on No. 19, with the arms of Holland in the ornamental shield, there is apparently little to connect it with the previous numbers

except for the fact that its double (No. 18) shows arms almost identical with 15 and 15a, with the figures in the compartments of the shield reversed and the filling in is somewhat different. Plate II. 20 & 21

The obverse die of No. 20 was originally engraved with two scale pans, like that on Nos, 15 and 15a. The engraver had evidently planned to decorate the shield of arms with the scales but apparently abandoned

the idea, perhaps because of the scales on the reverse, and therefore filed off the scales intending to put some other decoration in its place. Alternatively, he may have used an old die on which the previous arms had

not been completely removed, Whatever the cause, the connection with the previous numbers still remains and the reverse of No. 20 opens up a new field with its scales, the two crosses and the misformed jok which we also find on No. 21 and others, Plate II, 22

In view of the previous remarks, No. 22 requires no further explanation except to draw attention to the fact that the arms display the opposite order to tl.ose on No. 20, while the decoration to the left and right of the shield is almost the same as shown on No. 21. Plate II, 23 and 23a. Plate VII. C.

The arms on 23 and 23a are identical and seemingly break 833 from the series but a comparison of the reverse of 23a with the reverse of the coin letter C, Plate VIII, which although worn, still clearly shows the inscrip- tion Banjarmasin, Plate III. 26 to 29

The reverses of these coins have a cross-like figure between four dots oe above the imitation of the VOC mark on the reverse. On No. 26 there is a group of dots under the point of the V similar to those appearing on No. 5 on Plate I. The arms on the obverse of No. 26 are a variation of those on No. 21, while those on Nos. 27 and 28 are variations of Nos. 20 and 22.  To the left and right of the shield of arms on No. 26 is an inscription which probably reads coy, \| جمي‎ Jaman ini (=this time) and amounts to the same as Zaman murah or bargain time, shown on No. 12a and which is also found on No. 30 but now within the shield of arms, Plate III, 30,31,32 & 33. Plate.لا‎ 66.

On the reverse of No. 30 we find a figure above the V i.e. @ which also appears on No. 32 and twice on No. 31, only now arranged in the form of a rosette. The arms on No. 31 are the same as those on No. 33; the reverse of which was described by Millies in his text on p.168 and is also found on

# No. 66 (P1.V).

Plate 111. 32,34,35,36.37,38 © 39. Plate VI.68

The connection of the coins Nos. 32,34,35,36,37 and 68 with the supposed arms of Utrecht and an ornament taking the place of the lions is clear, Note also the arrangement of the numerals I8I on No. 68 and their
# 

similarity with those on No. 14. In place of the date on No. 37 the figure I occurs twice with an ornament between and is the same as that

appearing on Nos. 5 and 26, This arrangement is also on No. 38 although the coin is worn and the ornament is not visible, but the arms on the obverse confirm the connegtion, The reverses of Nos. 35, 37 and 38 have above the V a figure + and this figure combined with the two I's between dots (No. 37) but now with an o in place of

the ornament under the V is found on No. 39. The curious arms on the obverse of coin No. 39 presumably represents a warrior on a horse,

Plate IV. 40 to 46b. Plate V. 615 & 65. Plate VI. 67 © 75.Plate VIIE &F

As far as the arms are concerned on No. 40, this is a new type. The flower like decoration re-occurs on Nos. 41, 44, 45, 46a and كبا‎ and on E and F (P1.VII). To bring these coins, bearing what poses for arms, under one group, the following points should be observed:-

1st. The figure I with dots to the left and right of the shield or

similar arrangement --------- 40 اباو‎ 542,43,4% and 65.

2nd. The decoration to the left and right of the shield occurs in

approximately the same form on many others additional to those now listed -------- 45, 46a, 46b, E andF.

3rd. The reverse of E which is similar to Nos, 61b, 67 and, with

slight variation, No. 75 ------- E, 61b, 67 and 75. The significant I8I on No. 40 and finally the scales on No. 46b. Plate IV. 47 to 53

Moquette considered that in view of his previous remarks, these coins required no further discussion concerning their attribution to

Banjarmasin,. Plate - 54,55 and 64.  Plate VII.G.

Nos. 54 and 64 were catalogued by Fonrobert under Banjarmasin and Pontiak respectively but no reason for these attributions was given, No. 64 with the reverse showing the scales with two crosses and \| )jlc

= Adil, is so like Nos. 20 and 21 that no further remarks are necessary. The peculiar form of the  ١56١ under the shield on the obverse also

occurs on G (Pl. VII) but this time on the reverse, whilst on No. 54 this is transformed to er: to change to "ere or rore on No. 55.

Moquette also describes a variety of No. 54 with the letter V left and right of the shield differently positioned, That on the right is above the height of the E and that on the left is wnder the side of the V in the shield.of arms, The spave ths created above and below the V is filled in with a leaf like ornament. The reverse has under the oVc the date in the same form described above but now reading erre,.

Plate V. 58,59,60, Plate VI. 69,7071,718,72 73.79- Plate VII. 80,82

The common connection of the remaining specimens is more difficult. No. 58 is clearly from the same source as No. 19, but 59,60,69,70,71,/1a, 72,73,79, 80 and 82 afford little support.

The decoration on No. 70, 73 and the reverse of 71a; the hook like figure on 72; the reverse of Nos. 79, 80 and 82, were, in Moquette's opinion, all features sufficiently satisfactory to bring them within the Ban jarmasin series,
# eos $$ - - = $$

No. Of this piece he could find no explanation for the characters but thought the top two lines might indicate "Bumie" but he made no attempt to translate.

No. 82. The inscription on No. 82 is Nagara Daha. This was supposedly. the name of an old Hindu state in Java, but Moquette found in

the translation of a Malay manuscript that the name Daha was not foreign to Banjarmasin and was satisfied that the coin belongs to the series.

Nos, 83 Moquette refers to the fact that he had no half doits in his and collection that could be positively attributed to Banjarmasin, but he had some specimens, more or less decorated as shown on Nos, 83 and 84 which may provide an idea of their form but he could.not find on them any other support.

Plate.لا‎ 56,57,61a,62,63. Plate VI. 76,77,/8 Plate VII. D&H.

These numbers are not specifically mentioned by Moquette. H.C. Millies (p.168) recorded some further items including Moquettés Nos. و27‎

78 and 23 and Moquette evidently accepted the attribution of Millies.

For Nos. 56, 57 and D, the arms correspond with the arms on the obverses of Nos. 42, 43, 61a, b and c, 62 and 63. The reverse of No. 74 seems to link with the reverse of 59 and No. 76 obverse is similar to No.17.

# REFERENCES

(1) The Coins of the British Commonwealth of Nations, Part 2, Asian Territories, 1962,

(2) 1655 over de Munten van Bandjarmasin en Maloeka. Tipischrift voor Indische Taal; Land-en Volkenkunde. Batavia, 1906. (Vol. XLV III).

## (3)

Die Jules Fonrobert'sh Sammlung, Vol.3,Australien, Asien, Africka et Berlin. 1878.

(4) Catalogus der Numismatische Verzamaling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten an Wetenschappen, Batavia 1896.
# VAN COEVORDEN'S LIST APPENDIX I

A list of the copper coins of Banjarmasin and the associated but un-named

or unattributed series published by J.S. van Coevorden in the Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal -, Land-en Volkenkunde, Batavia, 1858.

Note: The sequence numbers are those used by Coevorden. In his

classification of obverse and reverse, Coevorden placed the Dutch Company's mark as the obverse or principal design but

which, in this series of native minted issues, is more

correctly the reverse, References and remarks have been added by the writer. Coevorden,

# DOITS INSCRIBED WITH NAME OF THE STATE 1.

Diameter: 21.5mm, Weight: 2.1 grammes, Obvs; A crowned shield in which نينسف‎ pay (Banjarmasin). R/: wow (2532) under which \\1~1\\~7(1221) and جوز‎ (43) above. Some thick strokes near the edge, Ref: Millies No. 271. Moquette No. 11.

Diameter: 21.5mm, Weight: 1.8 grammes, Obv; As No. 1 but a hook form scroll both sides of the %hield., R/: The Company's mark oVe. The date 1785 below and four dots above. Ref: cf Moquette No. 4 except for date. Evidently another variety.

Diameter: 20mm. Weight: 1.45 grammes, Obv: As No. 1 but the shield and inscription smaller and sharper. R/: The Company's mark oVc. J:Al below and a five petalled flower between two dots above. Ref: Another variety of Moquette Nos. or 3? Coevorden. Page 122,

# DOITS UNATTRIBUTED OR UN=NAMED. Le De

Diameter: 21.5mm. Weight: 1.45 grammes. Obv: The Company's mark cVo (wrongly). 809 below and three flowers above. R/: A oromed shield in »طخطاهد‎ 5 (Negri Daha); being the

old name of "Kediri". To the left and right of the shield indistinct Arabic characters. Various dies, Ref: Moquette No. 82 (See his remarks thereto for explanat on of the name Daha).

Diameter: 21.7mm. Weight: 1.95 grammes, Obv: cVo (wrongly). Indistinct letters above. By the c and o three dots. R/: A crowned shield in which sublo 6 y= (Bihamdihi 7).

Three dots each side of the shield, Ref: Millies No. 270.

Coricerning this particular coin Millies(p.168) remarks: "One other word upon a coin in the cabinet of Mr. van Coevorden which has exercised the skill of the Batavian

experts, who after many attempts managed to read&)\\o sy (Bihamdihi?) without being able to guess what this might signify. On examining the coin, of which I have taken an exact drawing one can see that the letters have received a rather fantastic shape or have been

ornamented and that it is quite simply (040: (Ban jarmasin) و‎ just as it is on the others. fhe reverse, which shows an imitation of the mak of the Dutch East India Company, also appears to bear traces of Arabic characters, --- 2. 9" 10, (Continued)

One would say they were س0 الله‎ ops (= in the name of God). Whether the coin has been over-stamped or whether this is a countermark has still to be decided,

Diameter: 20.5mm, Weight; 1.6 grammes. Ob: oVe \\V4\\ (1791) below and a five petaled flower between two

## dots above,

ee R/: A crowed shield in which cae. on both sides of the shield two U's above each VI. other

Ref: Coevorden records "various dies" for this type which conforms to the coin No. 54 illustrated by Moquette.

Diameter: 212. Weight: 2.17 grammes, Ob: Balance and scales with vv and YL between. R/: A crowned shield in which

On the left of the shield @ Vand Va on the right.

Ref: Another variety of the obverse design on Moquette No. 54. The balance and scales with the misformed عادل‎ (Adil) is copied from the English East India Company's Bombay Presidency copper

issues of the 1791-1794 and later emissions. (See illustration Fig. 1 below) Figure 1.

Diameter: 20 to 22mm. Weight 1.4 to 1.85 grammes. Ob: oVc The date 1789 below and a five petaled flower between two

dots above. R/: A crowned shield divided by two slanting lines into quarters;

## top and bottom quarters chequered.

In the left and right. quarters the inscription ما سأ‎ (massa). Scrolls each side

of the shield. Several die varieties. Ref: Another variety of Moquette's Nos. 47,48,77,/78 and H.

Millies, p.168, also describes this reverse design but offers no explanation for the inscription.

Diameter: 20.5mm. Weight: 1.55 grammes. Ob: oVc The date below erased, A five petaled flower between two

dots above. R/: A crowned heart shaped shield surrounded by scrolls and divided

into four quarters. In the top quarter a dot and in the other three quarters a cross between two dots. Ref: This reverse description conforms closely to Moquette No, 23 but it may be yet another variety,

Diameter: 21mm, Weight: 2.25 grammes, Ob: oVc between two dots below and a cross between two dots above, R/: A crowned shield in which a flower design, next to a dot on both sides of the shield, Ref: Moquette No. 40? or another variety. --- a سم‎

11. Diameter:  21.5mm, Weight: 1.35 grammes. Ob: oVc Here and there a few dots, R/: A crowned shield as on No. 8 but with the letters VU - ن‎ Ref: Apparently Moquette No. 50 but described by Coevorden from

a worn specimen. Millies, p.168, also describes this reverse design but offers no explanation for the inscription, which in this case may be meaningless, Moquette's No. 50 shows this letter? occurring on each side of the oVc mark. This time upside down "- \> حم‎

12. Diameter:  21.5mm, Weight: 1.5 grammes. Ob: cVo (wrongly). The date 8971 (1798) below and a cross between two dots above. R/: A crowned shield in which a flower spray Ref: This description resembles the coin illustrated by Moquette

on P1.VII, E. See also Moquette Nos. 45 and 46a for other varieties of this type.

13. Diameter:  20.5mm,. Weight: 2 grammes. Ob: The date 1789 below and a five petaled flower between

two dots above, R/: A crowed shield as on No. 8 but with the letters €°3 Ref: This description was probably taken from a poor example

and the letters 6-3 are wi (massa) backwards, as shown on Moquette No. 77. See remarks above to No. 8. Page 124,

1h. Diameter: 2imm, Weight: 1.75 grammes. Ob; As No. 13. R/: A crowned shield surrounded by scrolls and divided into

rectangular quarters. In each quarter a cross between four

dots. Ref: This type conforms to Moquette's Nos. 38,56,62 and 63.

15. Diameter: 21.5mm.  Weight: 1./7 grammes. Ob: cVo aoe at On each side three dots under each other and 88١ (4781 below and a cross above, Beaded border. R/: A crowed shield divided into rectangular quarters. In each quarter a figure. On each side of the shield is a scales, Ref: Moquette No. 18? or a variety.

Coevorden then mentions 3 other specimens in his collection -

21 had Ob. oVc or cVo with or without date below. R/: Most with a crowned shield, square or heart shaped some

with ornamental flowers or scrolls. 15 had Obs instead of oVc some ornamental scrolls or a balance

## with scales between which, عاد ل‎ = adil = justice, Page 338. 56. Diameter: 22mm. Weight 1.6 grammes.

Ob: On the left, fragments of some Arabic character under which

mim) (3131) and under these the date thr (1222). The right side is worn away. R/: A shield divided into four compartments by a cross with double

lines. In the lowest the figure ا‎ (3). Everything else erased with the exception of the dotted border, Ref: Millies Nos, 272,273 and 274. Moquette Nos.13 and 81. (See the

remarks to Moquettes Nos.13 and 81 which include those of Millies)
# ~ AL $$ = $$ Page 339.

57. Diameter:  20mm. Weight: 0.5 grammes, Ob: A crowned Shield in which a flower design. On both sides of the shieldl. R/: A crowned shield divided into two oblique compartments. On sides of the shield some scrolls and underneath two uncertain

numerals. Ref: Not recorded by Moquette but apparently a mule or a coin with

mixed designs. Obs description compares to Moquette's obverses Nos. 40,41 and

4). Rev. compares with the obverses on Moquettds Nos. 32,34 to 37 and 68.

58. Diameter: 21mm.  Weight: 1.9 grammes, Ob: A crowned heart shaped shield divided into four oblique

compartments in whichVETIOC, R/: A balance and scales between which V V and under some badly

formed letters which appear to me to be a very bad imitation of the word عاد ل‎ (adil). Ref: Not recorded by Moquette but like No. 57 is also from mixed

dies or designs (See Moquette's Nos. 20,21,52,64 and 66).

59. Diameter: 2imm,  Weight: 1.8 grammes, Ob: A heart shaped shield divided into four oblique compartments

in which V,E.I.C. Above the shield a cross and under it 1801. R/: Balance and scales with,))\\'e between and -%\* below. Ref: Not recorded by Moquette. The description of the obverse suggests the design is the normal bale mark of the English East India Company and the cross is the familar بك‎. The design of the entire coin is therefore an imitation of the English East India Company's Bombay Presidency copper issue.

60. Diameter:  21.5mm. Weight: 1.5 grammes, Ob: oVc with 8 between two flowers and two dots below. R/: A crowned shield divided into two oblique compartments. Ref: The reverse design represents the arms of Utrecht and the coin

belongs to the group listed by Moquette under his numbers 32, 3 to 37 and 68,

61.  Diameter: 21mm. Weight: 1.9 grammes, Ob: oVc with a cross above, Below, three dots between two flowers

with the letter T under. R/: A crowed shield at each side of which a scroll, wherein a

cross. The shield divided into four compartments. Top and bottom compartments chequered. I in the other two, Ref: Probably Moquette No. 80. Page 340.

62. Diameter: 20mm.  Weight 1.6 grammes. Ob: oVo (Wrongly). 90771 (1789) below R/: A crowned shield divided into four compartments. In each compartment a cross between four dots. Scrolls at each side of the shield, Ref: Conforms generally to Moquette Nos. 61a and 62, --- 63. ble 66. 67. 68. 69. $$ = $$ 45 °%

Diameter: 20mm, Weight: 1.5 grammes, Ob: A balance and scales between which us die - - The word, \} below. R/: A crowned shield divided into two oblique compartments. To the right of the shield the letter P and on the left S lying

down. Ref: Not in Moquette but a specimen in the writer's cabinet shows

the inscription in two lines (see illustration Fig. 2 below), and corresponds with the reverses on Moquette's Nos. 46b and 49,

# tS

## nae

Diameter: 16mm, Weight 1.4 grammes, Ob: oVc with asr\\ (1726). R/: A flower design. Ref: Not in 10011685856. The reverse description suggests a design similar to the doits issued by Alexander Hare at Maluka (Pridmore, Asia, p.242,. Nos. 7 and 9). If so, the piece is

struck with a mixed design. The diameter would indicate a half doit denomination but may simply be a forgery of this nétive minted series. Figure 2.

Diameter: 15.5mm. Weight: 1.5 grammes. Ob: oVc A star above and -ITI. below. R/: A crowned shield in which a flower design. To the left of the shield JW. The right side worn off. Ref: Not in Moquette but similar to his letter F on Pl. VII. Also a small diameter coin.

Diameter: 20 to 22mm, Weights; 1.35 to 1.8 gramnues,. Ob: oVc or cVo with a row of crosses above and \\\\\\ below. R/: Arms of Friesland. Also occurs with \\\*TY, SiS and ©668١ Ref: cf Moquette Nos. 53, and 67 (Netscher and van der Chijs, 1863,

Nos, 232-233 recorded this type under the issues of the State of Jambi in the island of Sumatra).

Diameter: 21mm. Weight: 1./ grammes. Ob: aVo with a star between two dots above and \\\*\*\\1% below. R/: Arms of Holland. Ref: cf Moquette No. 71 except for date numerals,

Diameter: 22mm, Weight: 2.5 grammes, Ob: oVc with a star between two dots above and  ١2١١ below, R/: As No. 67. Also with \\r2r Ref: A variety.

Diameter: 23mm. Weight: 2.2 grammes, Ob: oVc with a cross between two dots above and below, R/: Arms of Zeeland birt the lion in the shield facing right. Ref: Not in Moquette,.
# BANDJARMASIN gr. Bureau Bat.
# BANDJARMASIN Topogr Bureau Bat --- ص‎ < $$ = $$ ce jo) < oo
# BANDJARMASIN mt FF.
# BANDJARMASIN
# BANDJARMASIN

# B. G. No. 191 Plaat VII. --- Plate VIII

# 8. NETSCHER and J.A. VAN DER CHIJS (1863)

# DJAMBI (Plate XXIV)

# H.C. MILLIES (1871)

# BORNEO (COTE MERIDIONALE)