March 1984

# ORIZNT4AL NUMISMATIC SOCIET

# INFORMATION SHSsT NO. 25

# THE GOLD AND SILVER COINAGE OF THE SIKHS

# PART III. \[1 SIKH COINAGS OF KASHMIR. - Wiggins  & S.Goron.

# INTRODUCTION.

A brief account of the geographical location of Kashmir and its earlier history was given in Information Sheet No.11, April, 1975 (The Silver Coinage of the Dogra Maharajahs

of Jammu and Kashmir), so it seems unnecessary to repeat it here.

In AD 1752 Kashmir passed from the Mughals to the Afghans who had emerged as a conquering force under Ahmad Shah Durrani. The Durrani Shahs ruled Kashmir for 70 years through a succession of Muslim governors appointed from Kabul. Their rule was extremely harsh and oppressive and in AD 1413 the Kashmiris sought an external power to relieve them of this tyranny. They therefore appealed to Ranjit Singh, the Sikh Maharajah of Lahore, whose power in the Punjab was now manifest. Ranjit Singh responded to this appeal and in 1814 he launched an army towards Kashmir via the Pir Ranjal pass. It was however repelled by the Afghans and the Pathan governor of the time showed his exultation at his success by a renewed and fiercer persecution of the Kashmiris.

A further personal appeal to Ranjit Singh was made in 1818 by Birbal Dar, an influential refugee from Kashmir, who advised the Sikh ruler that it was an opportune time to invade Kashmir and oust the Afghans.

In April, 1419, Ranjit Singh despatched another army to Kashmir. It was commanded by Misr Diwan Chand, the most competent of the Sikh generals, who was joined by Gulab Singh

the xajah of Jammu. Fortunately for the Sikhs most of the seasoned Afghan troops were absent from Kashmir and beyond the Indus, so their advance was opposed only by raw levies. After a relatively short cempaign the capital of Kashmir, Srinagar, was occupied by the Sixhs on the 5th July, 1819.

The Sikhs held Kashmir as a subah of their empire from 1819 until 1846, when at the conclusion of the first Sikh War, Kashmir was ceded to Gulab Singh, xajah of Jammu, by the British on his agreeing to pay 7 million Nanakshahi rupees to them on benalf of the defeated Sikhs.

Ori occupying Kashmir, Misr Diwan Chand was granted the title Zafar Jang and nominated governor. The territory was divided into 20 parganas, had 20 collectors, ten thanas and 400 inhabited villages. Unfortunately for the Kashmiri population the rule of the Sikh Darbar proved no less harsh than that of the Afghans. The people were subjected to exorbitant taxation which amounted to gross extortion and oppression. Aftér generations of Muslim rule over 90% of the population had accepted Islam and it was mainly against the inhabitants of this faith that the Sikhs directed their ruthless policies.

Sikh rule in Kashmir lasted for 27 years and during this time there no less than ten governors wio administered the country on behalf of the Sikh Darbar. The probable reason for the frequent change of governors is traceable to Ranjit Singh's fear that one might at any time have declared his independence of Lahore and set up a separate state. As it was, they had hardly time to settle down to begin their task of administration. Of the tan governors, the last two were Muslims, five were Hindus and three Sikhs. °

Because the periods of office of these governors have some bearing on the coins that were issued during the Sikh occupation, their names are listed below together with the approximate dates of their governorship and some general remarks concerning them.

Mi This man was a Brahmin and a notable of the Sikh state. He was Kanjit Singh's most successful general and responsible for the occupation of Kashmir. He was governor until the end of 1819.

Diwan Moti Ram. A Hindu by religion and the son of a well known minister of Ranjit Singh, ne succeeded Misr Diwan Chand at the end of 1819 and governed for 14 months.
Sardar Hari Singh Nalwa was another of 15\[صقةت‎ Singh's generals who won fame during the

conquests of Multan, Peshawar and Kashmir. He appears to have accumulated a vast sum of money whilst in Kashmir, mainly by misappropriation and underhand deals. He is said to have introduced a new rupee of base coinage in Kashmir. He was governor from early in 1820 and throughout 1821. His administration was extreme and tyrannical and on. being recalled by Ranjit Singh his accumulation of wealth was confiscated.

Diwan Moti Ram was reappointed governor for a further term and served as such throughout

1822 until the end of 1824. Moorcroft is reported as visiting him in 1824.

Diwan Chuni Lal, a Hindu, was governor of Kashmir for two years; throughout 1825 and 1826.

On being recalled to Lahore for misgovernment, he committed suicide whilst on route there.

Diwan Kirpa Ram was the son of Moti Ram. He was evidently appointed governor at the end of 1826 and held office for three years and ten montns. His term is described by Vigne as being "the kindest and best of all." Ye was recalled suddenly to Lahore during the summer of 1831.

Bhima Singh Ardali apparently held office as a temporary measure for about 12 months from

the middle of 1831. During his governorship he was visited by Victor Jacquemont, 2a French naturalist.

Sher Singh was the reputed son of Ranjit Singh. He was governor of Kashmir from 1832 until 1834, but the precise dates are not known.

Colonel Mehan Singh Kumedan was governor from 1834 until 1841 and was also Commandant of

the Sikh garrison there. He seems to have been the best of the Sikh administrators and did much to restore trade, industry and agriculture in the valley. Ue would probably have not remained in office for so long but for the death of Ranjit Singh in 1839. Mehan Singh was killed by rebellious soldiers on the 17th April, 13841.

Shaikh Gholam Muhyid Din was the first Muslim governor of Kashmir. He had been chief

munshi (clerk) to Moti Ram but had been dismissed when Hari Singh took

office. de supported himself as a munshi until Karak Singh became Maharajah of the Punjab. dis abilities then seem to have been recognised and he was appointed governor. He held the position until 1845.

Shaikh Imam ud Din was the son of Gholam Muhyid Din and held the office of governor until

November, 1846, when Gulab Singh of Jammu took possession of Kashmir.

No information is available on the form of administration under which the mint was worked but it was probably under the overall supervision of the governor of the time, who was responsible for the general economic and monetary policy of the territory. Although all the Sikh coins of Kasnmir are dated, it seems that each governor decreed that his special mark or initial should appear on them so that it was known by whose authority they were issued.

# THE COINAGE.

Owing to its isolated position and the difficulty of conmunication with surrounding countries, all the various dynasties that have occupied Kashmir from the time of Kanishka in the 1st century A.D. have struck coins there.

The Muslims conquered the valley about A.D.1346, founding a dynasty known as the Sultans of Kashmir. They survived until A.D.1561 and were followed by the short lived dynasty of the Chak tribe, whose last three rulers were vassals of Akbar the Mughal.

In 4.1.1589 Kashmir was incorporated in the Mughal empire.

The first Mughal coins struck in Kashmir are dated Ilahi 44 of Akbar (= A.H.1007 or A.D.1598-99). Successive emperors coined there until Alamgir II, whose last ccins struck in Kashmir are dated A.H.1174 (A.D.1759).

Although the Durranis invaded Kashmir in A.D.1753-74, they did not issue coin there until it was annexed to their empire in A.D.1762 (A.H.1176) during the time of Ahmad Shah Durrani. Their last issue was in the name of Ayyub Shah and dated A.H.1234 (A.D.1818-19). --- 3.

Cn occupying Kashmir the Sixhs lost no time in issuing their own coin. Their first ruvees are dated S.1876 (A.D.1819). Thereafter they were struck each year until S.1903 (A.D.1846) but as the following catalogue snows there is much variation in each issue, with differing arrangements of the legends and a plethora of marks and symtols, for which explanations have been advanced.

On their rupees, the same obverse legend, in Persian, was used throughout. The reverse legend appears to have been subject to alteration from time to time and, where known, these are given. Althougn the Sixhs are reported to have changed the name of the capital town from Kashmir to Srinagar, the latter name does not appear on their Silver coins at all and only late in their occupation on their copper.

The copper coins struck during the Sikh occupation of Kashmir were recorded and illustrated by Valentine (1). Although they are of very crude fabric and were probably struck under licence by private contractors, the majority of them have some affinity with the contemporary rupees, particularly with respect to the marks and symbols that appear on them. There appears to be no reliable information available concerning the value of the copper coins ayainst thea rupee. The weights of the coppers are far from uniform and the denomination given on some of them is falus. The kauri was, from early times, used as a monetary token in Kashmir as elsewhere in India. In Mughal times in Kashmir eight kauris.were equal to one bahagain, two bahagains were equal to one punsu, four punsus were the equivalent of one hath, while ten hath were worth one sasun. The hath was a copper coin corresponding to the dam or one fortietn of a rupee. lost payments were reduced to equivalents of the hath, waich was later represented by the pice or

one sixtyfourth of a rupee. It is not known for certain whether these terms applied to any of the copper coins of the early 19th century but as common usage dies slowly, it is possible they did. A further report mentions that the tanga or anna (1/16 rupee) was tne chief circulating coin and all small transactions were carried on with it. Kauris rated at 20 to a tanga. The silver coins that were produced were confined to the rupee denomination. No fractions appear to have been struck and gold of the Sikh period is unknown. The weight of the rupee remained fairly constant but a.parently its silver content fluctuated. It is reported that Diwan Moti Kam first fixed the weight of silver in the rupee at

10 dangs and later at 9. Sardar Hari Singh fixed the weight of pure silver at 12 dangs and his coin was dubbea the Uari Singhji rupee. This name seems to have been applied to all subsequent Sikh rupees of Kasnmir. shaixh Gholam Munyid Din is said to have gradually reduced the weight of pure silver in the rupee to 8 dangs.

During the Sikh occupation of Kashmir there were three different kinds of rupee in general use. Mughal rupees: these old ripees were valued at only 10 annas against the Delhi (? Hast India Company) rupee. As well as tne rupees formerly minted in Kashmir by the Mughals, presumably ary type of Mughal rupee passed current. The transactions in the shawl markets were made in 5215 rupee. Sikh rupees struck in Kashmir: these were worth 12 annas against tne Company's rupee and were used for the

payment of rents, taxes and customs dues. WNanaksnahi rupees: These were the rupees of Lahore and Amritsar which passed current at 16 annas throughout the Sikn domain but were valued at 143 annas at Delhi. This coin was used for paying the Khalsa troops. --- 4. CAT A AuCG ibe

Ar rupee. Date: 5.1876. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 21 mm.

# 0b. GEL. ae sie JS yS إزنا لك‎

# L Ly zor anf"

## eV. ضرب‎

# ا‎ IAYT Mark: Flower spray.

aemarks: Believed to be the first issue of the Sikhs on taking Kashmir in 4.D.1819

5.1875). \<A rare type in comparison with No.2. Probably issued by the first governor, Misr Diwan Chand.

##:يس‎ S.1876. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diameter: 21.5 mm. iy) Ob. As No.1. Reve As No.4-but date divided by pipal leaf. Marks Flower spray.

iiemarks: Probably the second issue under the authority of Misr Diwan Chand or Diwan Moti Ram. 'hether the flower spray motif has any special significance as regards either governor is not known. The legends are identical to No.1 but the pipal leaf moved to a central position, dividing the date. several die variations of this type are known.

2a. Ar rupee. Date: 35.1876. Weignt: 11.3 grams. Diameter: 21 mm. A die variety of No.2.

Ar rupee. Date: 5.1877. Weight: 11.05 grams. Diameter: 23 mn. Us As No.1.

# AVY LED GY » Cer"

#!‏OA برص جلوس ‏bpS Marks Flower spray.

Xemarks: Struck in 4.12.1820 during the governorship of Dewan Koti Ham. This coin is characterised by tne large ill-formed pipal leaf on the reverse. The reverse legend has been modified to read "Struck in the district of Kashmir in the year of his auspicious reign Sambat 1377."

Ar rupee. Date: 5.13877. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diamcter: 21.5 mm. Ob. AS No.1. Reve As No.3. n° Mark: Flower spray.

aemarks: This type has identical legends to No.3 but the pipal leaf has been redrawn

to a more realistic form. No doubt another issue of Dewan Moti Ram which may, of course, have preceded No.3. --- pr

oe Ar rupee. Date: S.1877. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diameter: 22 mm. Ob. 'As No.1. neve As No.3. Mark: Flower spray.

Remarks: This coin is a variety of No.4 with a smaller pipal leaf decorated with dots.

Struck in A.D.1820 probably by Diwan Moti Ram.

6.  Ar rupee. Date: 3.1877. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 21.5 mm.. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.3.: yy Mark: Flower spray with J? added on stem.

Remarks: This coin is virtually identical to No.5 but a small 31 (Gurmukhi Ha) has been engraved on the stem of the flower spray. This would seem to indicate that this rupee is the first issue of Sardar Hari Singh Nalwa, who is said to have come to Kashmir as governor in A.D.1820.

Ar rupee. Date: S.1878. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 21 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.3.: Mark: Flower spray with J added on stem.

Remarks: A similar type to No.6 but with J (Gurmukhi H) added to the flower spray. Probably the succeeding type and the second issue of Sardar Hari Singh.

8.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1878. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 21.5 mm. Ob. As No.1. ee 4: - re

## Vath 5 Mark: A sprig or a flower. Rev. As No.3.

nemarks: This coin is dated to the governorship of Sardar Hari Singh but unlike the preceding and following coins bears no letter or letters referring to his name. The mark on the obverse is slightly different and may have been intended to represent a flower or a sprig. Ar rupee.

Date: S.1878. Weight: 11.1 srams. Diameter: 22 mm.

## Ob. هكم‎ Rev. As No.3. Nark: JJ (Gurmukhi - Hara).

## Remarks

Struck in A.D. 1821 during the governorship of Sardar Hari Singh with his abbreviated name boldly shown on the obverse.

10.  Ar rupee.\_\_Dates S.1879. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 22.5 mm. محسوب‎ Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.3.

## Mark (Nagari - Hara). 1 Ta (op

Remarks: A later type than No.9. The essential differences on this coin are the name Hara appears now in Nagari and there is a leaf like design added at the tip

of the pipal leaf. A further issue of Sardar Hari Singh. --- 5.1379. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diameter: 21 mm. Cb. As No.1.

## nev. As No.3. Nark: AI (Nagari - Haraji).

kKemarks: Whether this rupee is a leter issue than No.10 it is impossible to determine. An examination of the coins reveals no clues. The date indicates that Sardar Hari Singh was still in office during the early part of A.D.1822.

wate: 5.1379. Weight: 11 grams. \| Diameter: 21.5 mm.

## = Ob. Aa No.1. nev. As No.3.

## Marks 91%\] (Nagari - Um Sri).

Remarks: This is possibly the first type issued during Diwan Moti Ram's second term as

governor. The obverse bears the legend Um Sri, a religious invocation that accords with the fact that Moti Ram was a Hindu. The pipal leaf varies slightly in design on different coins.

13.  Ar rupee. Date: 5.1880. deight: 11 grams. Diameter: 22 mm. Ob. As No.1.

## Rev. As No.3. Marks: Ob. شرهرام‎ Rev. Dagger across the base of the 1 leaf.

Remarks: This rupee, struck in A.D.1823, is a further issue of Moti Ram during his

second governorship. Sri Ram (Honourable Ram) may be read on the obverse. The significance of the dagger on the reverse is not known.

74.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1881. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 22 mm. Ob. As No.1.

## JAA! Kev. o\_o" i SoS

# ضرب‎

## Mark fe

This coin is probably an issue of Moti kam, who is said to have been governor

until 1824. However, the change in tne reverse legend which occurs on this rupee may have been instigated by Diwan Chuni Lal, his successor. If it is a coin struck under Moti Ram then it is possible that he had the symbol changed each year. aemarks:

rA.eepur:etaD.1881.5:tagieW  50.11.smarg:retemaiL  22.‏mm ع grams. 22.5 mm‏ 11.10.5.1882 rams. 22 Mie‏ 11.00.5.1883 Od. As No.1. Rev. As No.14. Marks Flag.

nemarxs:,The rupees of these three years are virtually identical and were undoubtedly

issued under Chuni Lal, who was Sikh governor of Kashmir during the period 4.D.1824-26. ie appears to have retained the mark of a flag or pennant throughout his period of rule.
Dates S.1883. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diameter: 21.5 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.14. ote Mark: "3. 16.

Remarks: This coin bears no particular distinguishing mark; it could therefore have been struck by Chuni Lal or Kirpa Ram. The lack of any significant mark could also indicate that it was struck during an interregnum or handover period.

Date: 5.1883. Weight: 11.2 grams. Diameter: 20.5 mm. Rev. As No.14. Marks Flower spray.

Remarks: This rupee also has no special mark indicating that a particular governor was in office. The remarks under No.16 are also applicable to this coin.

17, Date: S.1883. Weights 11 grams. Diameter: 21.3 mm.: Ob. As No.l. Rev. As No.14.

## Mark Jf (Persian Kaf = KX).

Remarks: This coin indicates that Kirpa Ram became governor late in A.D.1826 or

at the beginning of 1827, as it is assumed that the Persian K is his initial.? Weight: 11.5 grams. Diameter: 22.5 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.14.

## Mark ems (Persian - K Ram).

Remarks: Similar to No.17 but bears the inscription K Ram in the centre of the obverse. A dated specimen has not been seen by the authors, but this type was probably struck in S.1883.

18.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1884. Weight: 11.2 grams. Diameter: 21.3 mm.: Ob. As No.1. IAA مم‎

# أكا ل ‏a ضراب ‏so

# Mark: & 3

Remarks: The period of Kirpa Ram's governorship appears to have been one of experiment

in the designs on the silver coins. In S.1884 a number of unconventional arrangements appear on the reverse with some intriguing marks accompanying the Persian K on the obverse. It will be noted that the reverse legend is arranged differently. --- 8.

19.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1884. Weight: 10.96 grams. Diameter: 20.5 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. Centre \|8780 oo ate

# Around سيم‎ SIST ريمشك‎ abs ng PP A Marks po

Remarks: A further issue of Kirpa Ram, this time with a completely different arrangement of the reverse. Within the central lozenge is the pipal leaf and date, whilst the rest of the inscription, including the mint, is arranged around it. The coin examined was rather poorly struck and most of the circular legend is wanting but it appears to be as given above. 20.  Date: S.1884. Weight:? Diameter: 21 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.19.

## $ Mark: ل‎ (as No.19).

Remarks: A variety of the preceding type. The pipal leaf and date are placed within a circle. This coin was illustrated by Rodgers in 1881.

poe Date: S.1885. Weight: 11.1 grams. Diameter: 22 mn. KZ Ob. As No.1.

# Sb لسولج‎

## Marks e J

Remarks: This type was struck by Kirpa Ram in 5.1885. The obverse continues to bear the letter ie §. The reverse has changed and bears the "takht akal bakht" inscription that appears on the coins of Amritsar. Two coins of this date are shown. They differ slightly in detail. It will be noted that the mint is now called Sri Kashmir.

22.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1886. Weight: 10.9 grams. Diameter: 21.5 mm.

# Ob. As No.1. IAAT. 14

# Rev. ىف صبا ضر‎ Jb

## Ur" ما لو‎ pyle fark: Obverse iS

## Reverse &

Remarks: \<Kirpa Ram - a similar type to No.21 but the date is placed above the word Kashmir and the word Sri appears.to be omitted. Struck in 3.1886 (A.D.1829).

23.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1887. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 21 mm. a a dl a Ob. As No.1. Rev. 'tg

## Marks \} os --- 9.

Remarks: Another issue of Kirpa Ram struck in S.1887. The obverse still has the letter و‎ which is now accompanied by a leaf spray. The date has moved back to the pipal leaf and the word Sri is definately missing.

Ar rupee. Date: S.1888. Weight: 10.85 grams. Diameter: 22.5 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.23.

## Mark "=" (Persian - B).

Remarks: This coin bears the Persian letter B on the obverse, and as it was struck in S.1888, is an issue of Bhima Singh.

Ar rupee. Date: 5.1888. Weight: 10.95 grams. Diameter: 23 mn. <A> 05. هك‎ 2;: Rev. As No.23.

## Mark Obverse سب-‎ (Persian B).

## Reverse J (Gurmukhi B).

Remarks: This type is similar to No.24 but as well as having the Persian letter

on the obverse, also has the Gurmukhi letter J on the reverse. The date remains S.1888.

Weight: 10.9 grams. Diameter: 21 mm. 10.85 grams. 22 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.23. Mark: Reverse - '

622155: Both coins are depicted here. They are virtually identical except for the dates

and the figures that can be seen on the reverse side. On the rupee dated S.1889 the figures 90 appear on the reverse. On the one dated 5.1890 the figures are 92. It is difficult to suggest a meaning for these numerals. The mark of a dagger can be seen to

the left of the word akal. This mark appears in the same place on the two following coins. This type of rupee was apparently issued during the governorship of Sher Singh or perhaps just before he took office.

Ar rupee. Date: S.1890. Weight: 8.5 grams. Diameter: 20 mn. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.23. Mark: Lion.

Remarks: This is a coin of Sher Singh dated 5.1890 (A.D.1833). The reverse is characterised by the depiction of a lion. Sher means lion in Persian.

Ar rupee. Date: S.1891. Weight: 10.9 grams. Diameter: 20 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.23. Mark: xeverse -- dagger.

xemarks: Similar to No.27 but the lion is absent. The date S.1891 can relate to both Sher Singh or his successor Colonel Mehan Singh Kumedan. The latter's coins otherwise all have the ~~ symbol on them, so this type may be an issue of Sher Singh or was produced during the interval between governors. --- 29. Remarks: 30. gemarks: 10.

Date: 5.1891. Weight: 11 srams. Diameters 21 mn. Ob. As No.1. Rev 85ح‎ + e -"~ شري إكال,

## Mark "OX

The obverse bears the sword and belt symbol which is found on all Mehan Singh's

rupees up to the year 5.1898. The reverse legend has not yet been read with certainty. Sri akal Kashmir is clear enough on this and other coins; the top two lines below the date are a puzzle. One suggestion is that they represent the religious invocation "Haraji" previously encountered on some rupees of Hari Singh (see No.11), where it also refers to the name of the governor. There is also an unread word to the left of the lam of akal.

Ar rupee. Date: S.1892. Weight: 7.6 grams. Diameter: 21 mn. RIT SIT ST a AUS للح‎ 271355 ATAS

## Rev. asa 14 rs ft 3\]

# ~~ VAT SCAT Mark: YOR?

This is an unusual coin weighing a little over seven grams and bearing

Gurmukhi legends on both sides. Mehan Singh's sword and belt symbol appears on the obverse while the reverse has the date 5.1892 plus the figures 97. The significance of the latter figures is unknown but it could well follow

on from the figures found on No.26 above. A possible explanation for these numerals is that they are years starting from some event of importance in Sikh history. Therefore, if 5.1892 corresponds to year 97, then the era concerned or the event that occurred was in 5.1795 or A.D.1738. The only notable event that occurred in that year, so far as the Sikhs are concerned, was the execution of one of their important theologians, Bhai Mani Singh, by Zakariya Khan, the Mughal governor of the Punjab. This sad occasion could hardly be thought important enough to marx the commencement of an era which ' was subsequently recorded on the coinage of Kashmir.

The expression Sri Akal Furukhji on the reverse is, according to Rodgers, the

commencement of the Akal Astut, a hymn in praise of the Timeless One. The words mean "Hail, Timeless Divinity." The obverse inscription seems to represent the usual Sikh couplet.

Rodgers published a gold coin similar to this one, weighing 167 grains

(10.821 grams), but with a reverse inscription which he read as "Wah Guru ji,

Wan Guru ji, Wah Guru ji," the religious cry of the Sikhs. The status of these coins is not known. The light weight of the silver coin and its reference to the Akal Astut hymn suggest a religious or presentational purpose rather than a coin meant for ordinary circulation. The gold coin is of normal mohur weight. These coins are rare. wxeaders are also referred to the coin of Miscellaneous Type D on page 16 of our paper on the coins of Amritsar. --- 11, Date: S.1893. 73.1894.

# S.1895. 5.1896.

# S.1898. Weight: c.10.85 grams. Diameter: 21-22 mm. اسح سا اذ اس ee‏ ~~ Ob. As No.1.

# se, Rev. ظ‎ Tele Mark: "OR?"

Remarks: These are regular issues of Mehan Singh and are known from each year between S.

1893 - 1898. There are slight variations in the design of the pipal leaf. On a coin of 5.1898 the symbol " appears below the sword motif. This may represent a lamp or an altar. The reverse inscription poses another problem. Above the two lines read as "Haraji" (?) (see No.29 above) is an additional

letter which would appear to be a K, as on some coins it is clearly written

Js, 'ihat this refers to and how it fits in with the rest of the inscription the authors are unable to explain.

Date: 5.1898. Weight: 10.5 grams. Diameter: 22 mn.

# - 1899 - - As No.1.

Remarks: In 5.1898, Shaikh Gholam Muhyid Din became governor of Kashmir. His first coins are similar to No.29 except that Mehan Singh's sword and belt are replaced by the Persian letter © (Sh) and the date is divided on each side of the pipal leaf. The reverse legend has the problematic two line "Haraji" inscription at the top. Various leaf sprays are found in the loop of the and the ب‎ symbol appears on some coins below this letter.

33.  Ar rupee. Date: S.1899. Weight: 10.42 grams. Diameter: 22 mm. Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.31. Mark: As No.32.

Remarks: Similar to the preceding type but with the letter مد‎ (K) at the top of the reverse (see No.31 above). This coin appears to have been struck by the governor only in S.1899. --- 5 SA \_\_ Ar rupee. Date:/S.1900. )

S.1901. ) Weight: c.10.7 grams. Diameter: c.20-21 mm. S.1902. ) Rev. As No.32.

## Marks

Obverse - 5.1900 Cw. > » ws 3.1901 (7 UO - HO s.1g02 Mw"

Remarks: This is a further issue of Shaikh Gholam Muhyid Din and is known only for

the years cited above. Cn the obverse various symbols are found to the left of the letter 7 و‎ the reverse reverts to the two line inscription at the top ana the date lies to the left of the pipal leaf.

35.  Ar rupee. Dates. $.1903. Weight: 10.7 grams. Diameter: 20.5 mm.:: Ob. As No.1. Rev. As No.32.

# شن عو:‏kraM

Remarks: This type is similar to 10.34. Dated 5.1903, it has a different symbol to the left of the WJ". This is probably a coin struck under the governor Shaikh Imam ud Din, who took office in A.D.1345 (S.1903).

# BIBLIOGHAFHY.

Valentine Wa. The Copper Coins of India. Part 2. The Punjab. London, 1914.. Drew fF. The Jammu and Kashmir Territories. London, 1875. \<hushwant Singh. Zistory of the Sikhs. New Jersey, 1963. Rodgers C.J. Qn the coins of the Sikhs.

kodgers C.d. The Catalogue of the Coins in tae Government luseum, Lanore. Calcutta, 1891.

Sufi G.M.D. Kashir - Being e history of Kashmir from the earliest times

to our own. University of the Punjab, Lahore, 1:49.

The co-operation and help of the following O.N.S. members is gratefully acknowledged:

## iEr.H.GeRhodes, kr.N.Lowick, Mr.C.Panish, Mr.J.Lingen and Mr. = brs.J.A.xoskem.
# APPENDIX A.

Transliteration and translation of the legends. 1 & 2. 5 Oe t3- 14 to 20. 21. 22 to 28. 30.

## 31. 33. 34 & 35. Obverse:; Reverse: Obverse: Reverse: Obverse: Reverse: Obverses Reverse: Reverses Obverse: Reverse: Obverse: Reverse: Obverse; Reverse: Obverse: Reverse: Obverse: Reverse: Obverse: Reverse:

Deg, tegh wa fath was nasrat bederang yafat az Nanak

Guru Gobind Singh $$ = $$ Abundance, the sword, victory and help without delay Guru Gobind Singh obtained from Nanak.

Zarb Sambat 1876 Khitta Kashmir $$ = $$ Struck in Samvat 1876 in the territory of Kashmir. As 1.

Zarb Sambat 1877 Khitta Kashmir julus maimanat manus = Struck in Samvat 1877 in the territory of Kashmir, the years of auspicious reign. As 1.

Zarb Khitta Kashmir, Akal sahai, Sambat 1881 $$ = $$ Struck in the territory of Kashmir with the help of God in Samvat 1881. As 1.

(Zarb) Sri Kashmir 1885 julus maimanat manus, takht Akal bakht $$ = $$ (Struck in) honourable Kashmir in 1885 the year of his auspicious reign. Prosperity to the throne of God. As 1.

Zarb Kashmir 1886 jalus maimanat manus, takht Akal bakht $$ = $$ Struck in Kashmir in 1886 the year of his auspicious reign. Prosperity to the throne of God..458 ٠٠

## (Zarb Kashmir) Sri 4181 jui

\* This legend is incomplete on most coins and what can be seen cannot be translated meaningfully. As 1 (in Gurmukhi).

Jarb i Kasamira i Sri Akal Purukhji 1892 = Struck in Kashmir - Hail Timeless Divinity. As 1.

(Zarb Kashmir) Sri Akal jui.......... An incomplete legend that cannot as yet be translated ' satisfactorily. As 1. As 29. As 1. As 31. As 1.

As 29.