# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY NOVEMBER

## Geographical Situation

fonk was an Indian Native State, consisting of six isolated districts rtl in Rajastan (Tonk, Aligarh and Nimbhara) and partly in Central India (chnabra, Pirawa and Sironj ) and separated from each other by distances varying from 20 to 250 miles. The total area of the State was 2,553 square miles and its population in 1901 was 275,201.

- - JIND x Say hus \\ \[es Churt J ger: alaL. $$ = $$ 80/1  م 1 الا‎ ' "Son 1s," لوم ز3\[ه"‎ oChir ari GURGA \| Rata 4 لان ل ايدسال‎ 0 Pabwnlt\\ ~

gr فدات‎ © ' haw. سر‎ Vi ف‎ aaa 6 ا "نتن‎ Tijara? Bi Ysar ' Bidesir Shekhjawaty.. oe أل ؟‎ @Kishangorh \* Is 2-2 tho Nawalg / font oTM wor ror boa ag \\ Suyjangarh 1 ع 7سسفدالتي \| ١و عبرم زه‎ duipur pow % للا ما‎ 0 ama ب يل ا‎ 36 "لشف‎ 7 ' Sikar Shanda: 1 وبق‎ 24 amgarh \| Bra 7 ae fadhoyy  ١ 2 Laswart Did aL A Py. Sager, alt 1 Munohaty \{ Lachmgna ب‎ Kumber re FN. Dina Macly rt ie © Roengusy samod Sapir: Katuyidas BHARATPUA $$ = $$ Kuclupvan ae ' اعضع زهاا‎ Akhegarh?. agaur Merrath ie i Kuchawin, 7. PU RY ) Raswa ulo ve مث اهمع‎ oii we - MT.  Gute 5 0 الت سر ل ا‎ BP; - ie.--- وذ‎ Jaipur pw' gc. «\>. mm; rG / م‎ a aoe aosd - odo Asop oy WDegan Th nagar, لكا 1 8م‎ 4 0 -- = Soda Big $ ap +. اي حت الو يار 4 ف - لفوت‎ 7 4 Balahera®: 2 74 j, J لضا‎ BX (7 م10‎ I x A i::;: Tilgtuniaa, Bamanyan \\ Maen Sue" °Naewa, heats eg 05: nls ف 4و5‎ Kishangarh Goan 04 1 Lalsot / 00 5 Patni \| "2 يع‎  ١ 003 Muy / oKarault. pe سل‎ ery رم‎ KRAUL لل الي‎ a st \| odhpyp? un Bab), of Mintruels 2 للدم‎ Stil, 26 ا‎ panas ار\[‎ Utyir ie af lite Lesbian, ATE ae \| J 0 Vals P U Ry كود يامب اي‎ i اف‎ mae Re 78 i. ae ar, 5 21 9 7 ده سيان‎ 'a ra "6 are eee, op rn RS 42 Fine aks ae os v4

a d 5 7 - يا‎  a. Salle 8 "i "Paaind, "- $$ 0 = ae $$ 'Gam A, vats 5 ا ين ام عيبأ كسولوسصم‎ Shahpura ف ال سد 3 امال‎ \\ ANG wes $$ = $$ a a Nuloky, 'Peep 7 (fo Banerc 290 \\ Vu & 2# 4 م $$ =. $$ دم د 8 ين‎ ude may " Bes: / ا"‎ \_ 1 1 8 br NCA

د‎ @Mandalgarh 1s سا‎ Shaabat رازؤمانمأ‎ Tana 5 ' tg ea ‏r 7 سي 3 كك seci eriS 5  1  iN ‏€ مم ‏eu

## Pargo\_\_

fs " 95‏ $$ \Ae) = $$ Bhadaura 5 ا‎ on ' ah 1 8 ~ للك‎ an 7 1 م‎ writer?) tea an bra paung; /

لللتنلل 0000 ايي‎ DI barn 002 "arcing 4 محا رسربيا‎ 5 this vy & tH Nee mie.. Kaghiag - تسوت‎ vinta bh \_ wm
## History

In the reign of the Moghul Emperor Mohammed Shah (1131-61 A.H), one Taleh Khan,

a Pathan or Afghan of the Buner tribe, left his home in the Buner country and took service with Ali Mohammed Khan, a Rohilla of distinction. Taleh's son, Haiyat Khan acquired some property in Moradabad, and to him in 1768 Amir Khan, the founder of the State, was born. As a petty mercenary leader, he rose to be commander of a large army in the service of Jaswant Rao Holkar of Indore, He was employed in the campaigns against Sindhia, the Peshwa, and the British,

and in assisting to levy the contributions exacted from Rajputana and Malwa. It was one of the terms of the union between Amir Khan and Holkar that they should share equally all future plunder and conquests, and in 1798 (1212 AH) he received for his services the district of Sironj which had been held by Baji Rao Peshwa from 1736 tO 1754 and until 1798 by Jaswant Rao Holkar. In 1806 (1220 AB)

the district of Tonk, after which the State came to be known, was added, Nimbhara following in 1809, and Chhabra in 1816,

On the entrance of the British into Malwar, Amir Khan secured under a treaty of November 1817 (1223 AH), 8 guaranteed tenure of all the lands he held under grants

from Holkar, on condition that he disbanded his army of fifty-two battalions of disciplined infantry and surrendered his artillery, with the exception of forty guns, as a valuation.

Nawab Amir Khan died in 1834 (1250 AH) and was succeeded by his son, Wazir

Mohammed Khan, who, during the mutiny, repulsed with comparatively few men an attack made on the Tonk fort by the combined forces of the Nawab of Banda and Tantia Topi. For these services, his salute was raised to 17 guns and, in 1862 he received a "sanad " guaranteeing the succession to his family according to Muhammadan law, in the event of the extinction of his line of direct descendents. At his death in 1864 AD (1280 AH) he was succeeded by his son Mohammed Ali Khan, who soon made himself unpopular with his subjects. He forbad the building of Hindu temples, or even repairs to existing ones, and in his overpowering desire

for increased revenue he resorted to every means of wringing money from the jagirdars and cultivators. In consequence of his involvement in a treacherous attack on the Thakur of Lawa, he was deposed on the 8th of August 1867 (1284 AH) and exiled to Benares where he died in 1895 (1313 AH).

Muhammed Ali Khan was succeeded on the 19th January 1868 (1284 AH) by his son Moh-

ammed Ibrahim Ali Khan, but until 1872 (1289 AH) the State was administered by a Council of Regency controlled by a resident British Officer. At the end of the

regency, the capital was moved from Sironj to Tonk city where it remained, Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan died on 23rd June, 1930 (1349 AH) and was succeeded by his second son Mohammed Sa'adat Ali Khan who reigned until the State became part of the Indian Republic in 1947. 'it Coinage

The main mint until 1873 was Sironj and all coins were struck there. It was known as a mint for copper in the time of Akbar and for silver under the later Mohguls (Farrukhsiyar and later rulers). Prior to 1212 AH, when Sironj came in possession of Amir Khan, silver coins of the following type were struck in the name of Shah Alam II, --- a Sy

Amir Khan may have continued striking this type for the remainder of the reign of Shah Alam (i.e. until 1221 AH), but no specimens are yet known. The first coins which can be attributed to Amir Khan are copper coins, dated 1225 and 1226 AH (Class III A) from Sironj mint, in the name of Muhammed Akbar II. The reverse of these coins bears the design of a horse, referring most probably to the illustrious Pathan horses of Amir Khan's Cavalry.

The earliest date observed on silver coins from Sironj is 1235 AH (Class I A) found on the usual Moghul type in the name of Mohammed Akbar II. This series is known to at least 1269 AH for silver (Class I B) and to 1253 AH for copper

(Class III B). After the Indian Mutiny in 1857 the last Moghul ruler Bahadur Shah was deported to Rangoon and the Indian Native States abandoned the practice

of retaining the Moghul emperor's name on their coinage, Like many other Native States, Tonk acknowledged the British supremacy by introducing a new design of silver coin bearing the name of Queen Victoria on the obverse and the name of the local ruler, Wazir Mohammed Khan, on the reverse (Class Ic). The

earliest date known for this type is 1276 AH (= 1859) and they were known as "Muhammed Khani", In 1280 AH a fly-whisk was added to the reverse and they became known as "Chanwar Shahi". This fly-whisk became a prominent mark on all the later coins of Tonk State.

Both silver and copper coins of Sironj mint are known in the name of Queen Victoria and the successor of Wazir Mohammed Khan, Mohammed Ali Khan but all so

far observed are dated after his exile to Benares (Class I E and III 5(. Possibly the Council of Regency preferred to withhold the right of coining from Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan until he came of age and continued to employ the name

of Mohammed Ali Khan. With this series fractions of the rupee denomination are found for the first time struck from the same dies. On many coins of Sironj mint of this period a number can be seen at the left of the mint. Where sufficiently recognisable this seems to be 23 and should be regarded as a fictitious date most probably based on the regnal years of Mohammed Akbar II.

With the end of the regency, Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan transferred the capital

and the main mint to Tonk, although Sironj mint continued in operation until at least 1314 AH (1896), striking in his own name copper and silver coins including

fractional rupees (Class I F and IIIF). In place of the fictitious regnal year noted above a Christian date is found on the obverse although only a single copper coin shows a complete date (Class III F Type b).

While the coins struck at Sironj are all very scarce with, in most cases, only

a Single specimen being kmown, the mint at Tonk provides an almost continuous series from 1290 to 1352 AH apart from the period between 1318 to 1340 AH when

coins are known only for 1329, 1330, 1335 and 1336 AH, crude pisces The earliest copper coins which have been attributed to Tonk mint are/dated 1284

and 1285 AH (1867-68) and these have often been regarded as the earliest coins struck there.

paisa dated 1284 AH another type of the same date. Coins dated 1285 exist --- -  Qa

It is interesting to note that as early as 1917, R.G. Gyani attributed these

coins not to Tonk, but to Sidi Ibrahim Khan 111 (1848-1879) of Janjira (Ref: 3.1.3.8. 1934, Numismatic Supplement XLV, page 71-73) and in a letter dated

17th January, 1870 the existence of coining implements at Janjira was reported (Ref: Financial Department Proceedings January 1876, No. 18). As the mint of Janjira was ordered to close by the British in 1834 (Ref: Financial Report

## No, 0

19th September, 1834) this attribution was not unanimously accepted.

However, the Financial Department Proceedings also contain a report from Sidi Ibrahim Khan himself saying that the coinage of rupees had been stopped in his territory during the reign of his father Sidi Mohammed Khan (1826-1848) and had never been resumed, but the coinage of copper money had been carried on for some considerable time back, The custom was to give a bar of copper to Dhamoo Kasar, Tambut, who with six others were employed by the Nawab to make the pice. \| (Ref: Financial Department Proceedings January 1876 No. 136). It seems clear that copper coins were struck at Janjira up to at least 1870 and there is no basis on which to attribute these specimens to Tonk mint. Supporting evidence for this view is provided by a letter of 24th March 1870 from the Assistant Agent, Governor General, Tonk, in which he states "There is only one mint in the principality, and is located at Seronge". (Ref: Financial Department Proceedings January 1876 No. 56.).

The earliest coins struck at Tonk mint are likely to be those dated 1290 AH

(#1873) (Class II F and IV F) and bearing the name of Queen Victoria on the obverse and that of Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan on the reverse, Some types of this Class show an AD date on the obverse as well as the normal AH date on the reverse of the coins, This became the general pattern for all later issues from both Tonk and Sironj mints. In 1877 Queen Victoria assumed the title of Empress of India and all issues from this date onwards bear this title (Class II G),

On the copper coins of this period a major part of the legend is normally off the

flan and only the centre portion of the inscription can be observed. This makes it extremely difficult to arrive at a satisfactory reconstruction of the full inscription.

The only knowmgold coins of Tonk State are of 1 and 2 Mohur denomination and dated 1880/1297 (Class II © - type c). They were struck with dies similar to those used for the silver coins. During the same period some 2 rupee pieces were struck, Two dates 1880AD/1297 AH and 1881AD/1298 AH, are known. No satisfactory explanation has been advanced to explain why the gold coins and the double rupees were struck.

No coins are known yet dated to Edward VII's reign but in 1911/1329 AH a large

number of copper coins were struck (Class IV J - type a to e) 'using at least 5 distinct combinations of dies. A new type of paisa of a better design was introduced in 1917 (Class IV J - f) but fer reasons unknown it was produced for a short period only. A crude type of paisa was struck in 1924 and again at regular intervals until 1928. Apart from the rupee of 1912 AD/1330 AH no silver coins are known from the first half of George V's reign, but from 1923 to 1929 most dates are represented and in 1928 4, + and + rupee pieces were produced.

Early in the reign of Mohammed Sa'adat Ali Khan, paises were struck by machine at the Calcutta mint (Class IV - K) the first issue ene a) being dated 1932/1350. These coins being equal in weight and size to the British + anna, were hoarded and soon disappeared from circulation so that in 1934 a second issue had to be struck similar to type a and of the same weight, but smaller in size. This, together with a locally struck 2 anna coin (Class II K), eased the situation for the demand for small change. The 2 anna silver coins, the last issue of Tonk mint, were withdrawn from circulation some five years later, all silver "Chanwar Shahi"

currency being demonetised on the ist May, 1941. The withdrawal from circulation however, lasted another 12 to 18 months.

The majority of the rupee denominations of Tonk mint are fairly common, although

some types and dates are scarce. The gold coins are extremely rare and the --- «@ © ا

double rupees can be classed as rare to very rare. As with most other series of Indian Native State coins, the minor denominations are much scarcer than the rupees and this is illustrated by the mintage figures for the year 1926 when 63,923 rupees were struck but minor denominations, (4, + and + rupees) totalled only a value of Rs 2,690. Weights

Closely related to the coinage, are some copper tola weights (Class V) dated

1303 and 1308 AH (1886, 1891) which were issued, and perhaps used solely by the Tonk Government. The weight of a tola was 11 mashas and 3 rati (170-625 grains), which is also the weight of the rupee. Tola weights are well known in India, but generally are of a more precious metal like gold, manufactured by Sarafs or bullion merchants and used as stamped bullion. This does not apply to the tola weights of Tonk as they are of a base metal and issued by the Tonk Government, which might indicate that they were intended as standard weights and measures, There may well be other equally valid purposes, Aknowledrements

This paper, although intended to be comprehensive, might not be complete, especially regarding the coins of the Sironj mint. I hope that anybody having types or dates, other than those listed, will communicate with me so that further amendments may be made in due course,

I am grateful to our members, Richard K. Bright, Enrico Manara, Charles K.Panish Peter R8ver and Ken W. Wiggins for providing data, information and assistance for this Information Sheet. References

Financial Department Proceedings, January 1876.

Imperial Gazetteer of India - Oxford 1907. Administration reports of Tonk State, Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, Vol. XXXII part II, pp 213/214. W.D. Craig 'Coins of the World 1750=-1850' (2nd edition). 8.5. Yeoman 'Catalog of Modern Coins' (11th edition). Catalogue of coins in the Indian Museum Calcutta Vol. IV. Catalogue of Coins

The coins have been classified by their metal and mint and subdivided according

to the names of the local ruler and the overlord,

Class I - Silver coins of Sironj mint Class II - - Gold and Silver coins of Tonk mint Class III - Copper coins of Sironj mint, Class IV - Copper coins of Tonk mint Class V Tola weights of Tonk

A - Amir Khan in the name of Mohammed Akbar II Wazir Mohammed Khan in the name of Mohammed Akbar II

بدا‎ i " / Victoria Queen Mohammed Ali Kha Victoria Queen In the name of Mohammed Ali Khan/Victoria Queen but issued during the

regency period of Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan. Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan/Victoria Queen Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan/Victoria Empress Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan/Fdward VII

Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan/George V Mohammed Sa'adat Ali Khan/George V 2 وم نت وم 8 جل 8# يد © تت ب هم ١‏ ١ ١ ١ ١ --- Amir Khan (1212-1250 AH - 1798-1834 AD)

# CLASST.A.

All silver coins shown on the following plates, if not stated otherwise,

are rupees weighing approximately 170 grains. Thewights of the fractional coins (struck with the same dies) are in proportion to the rupee. The gold coins are single or double mohurs with 1 mohur = 170.6 grains.

Copper coins of Sironj mint weigh approx. 234 grains. Copper coins of Tonk mint weigh approx. 1235 grains at first but gradually decrease. until the latest issues weigh only 68 grains. Silver Coins ل‎ Sironj mint.

# Obverse

- - Reverse  Inscription Inscriptior. Li EF Sa, ee ee ey

# Observed: ee 2 - - zy Was  2 3

Wasir Mohammed Khan )1250-1280 AH - 1854-1864 AD)

CLASSI.B. Obverse ا‎ iteverse Inscrivtion Inscription as Class I.A. as Class I./.

Dates Observed: 1252 AH ost 1269 AH معد‎ 1264 نزم‎

CLASSI.C. typeas Obverse - - Reverse Inscription Inscription

# ٠. DUA

# Dates لغ‎ xj iT Observed: --- جيه‎ Ivvy moh \] ولع‎ Jt

type bs Obverse - - xkeverse  Inscription Inscription z as type a, but as typ a. fly-whisk over (J Dates Observed: --- $$ = $$ Tf -

Mohammed 411 Khan (1280-1284 AH - 1864-1867 aD)

## CLASSI,.D.

Wo coins of this dass observed. Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan (1284-1349 AH - 1867-1930 AD) Raveres Obverse \| 5 Inseription CLASS I.E. as class I.C. typea. Inscription Dates Observed: -\_-- \| - - 428- (+ rupee سه ده‎ (1/8 rupee)

CLASS I.F. Obverse - - Reverse نسدد‎  ties 6 Inscription 7, "deanna LOY

# Dates "Observed: 1892 i Cie كلب 1893 ننه‎ py $$ 1314 (= rupee) $$ (+ rupee) Gopper Goins Amir Khan (1212-1250 AH - 1798-1834 AD)

# CLASSIII.A. Sironj mint. Obverse Reverse Inscription 17

# Dat و‎ Observed: 1226 AR شادعاز لأا‎: 1225 م‎ ee

Wasir Mohammed Khan (1250-1280 AH - 1834-1864 AD)

CLASS III.B. Obverse - - £Reverse  Inscription as CclassTI.A. Dates Observed: 1253 AH Inscription rathon horse

# Ay Inscription as Class I,A,
CLASS 111.0. No coins of this class have been observed.

Mohammed Ali Khan (1280-1284 AH - 1864-1867 AD) 0455 III.D. No coins of this class have been observed.

Mo Ibrahim Ali Khan (1284-1349 AH - 1867-1930 AD) \| CLASS III.E. bverse Reverse Inscription Inscription as class I.C, as class 1.6 type a Dates Observed: $$ = $$ ---- $$ =~ $$ -\_-

CLASSTII.F. Type a Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription Inscription

# Dates Tas \| Observeds - - A EY ور‎ Type 2 Obverse هس‎ 6 Inscription Inscription

## as ea A 2 در‎ WPy Dates Observed: - - ~~  --- --- FE eee ee eee \_- --- Gold and Silver Coins - - Tonk mint.

## Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan (1284-1349 AB - 1867-1930 AD)

| Type a | CLASS. I1.F. |
|:--- |:--- |
| Dates | Observed: |
| Dates | Observed: | Dates Observed: Dates Observed: Type c Dates Observed: Type 6 Dates Observed: Type e Dates Observed: Obverse Reverse

# 1873 AD

# 1873 AD Obverse \_ Reverse

## \|\|\|

| Reverse | Obverse |
|:--- |:--- |
| 3921سالام | ee |
| Obverse | Reverse |

## 3921 سالام ee Obverse Reverse as type c as type 8 Inscription 8

## Inscription 8 Type a but no date over "Queen Victoria" Po) as

# nscription 8 6 L bh Pi

# 7 عبر‎

## Inscription AS type © and Inscription 1 Inscription 9 as type a but no date over "faz1" a@ifferent fly-whisk Inscription 9

28 type a but different fly-whisk to the left of "f-21" date over "yazdan" Inscrintion 9 2s type c but fly-whisk to the right of "fazl" and date over "fazl" Inscription as type d
# CLASS II.G. Type f Dates Observeds Type a.

| Dates | Observeds |
|:--- |:--- |
| Type | b |
| Dates | Observed: |
| Type | \_c¢ |
| Dates | Observed: |

## Type b Dates Observed: Type \_c¢ Dates Observed: Type 0 Dates Observed: Obverse $$ = $$ Inscription 2s type b Inscription

# oot

| 3-3 | Reverse |
|:--- |:--- |
| 18xx |. |
| 18xx | 1296 لو‎ | 18xx.

# 18xx 1296 لو‎ Obverse $$ = $$ Inscription AD dete over "K" of "Tonk Inscription Obverse 3-5

## إ ل

# Me yb

"(double rupee ) " " (4 mohur) tt " (2Mohur) " " (double rupee) $$ = $$ Reverse Inscription Inscription as type d Inscription 9 as Class II... Type f Inscription es type a but Low (error) instead of

# C Inscription

## eee ee مر ول‎

# yer Inscription 9 --- CLAss 11 H

# CLASS. II J Type e Obverse

| Dates | Observed: |
|:--- |:--- |
| Tyne\_f | Obverse |
| Dates | Observed: | Tyne\_f Obverse Dates Observed: Ww ينا‎ ينا‎ فيا‎ Type g Obverse oa Dates Observed: -- لس‎ Reverse Inscrivtion eS Type d Inscription (z; rupec) (2: rupee)

## "

(% ruvee) " +)غ)‎ runpec) " (1/8 rupee) 3 rupec) 1 لى‎ Reverse Inscription ae:' Gi: oe as type f No coins of this class have been observed.

| Type م‎ | Obverse |
|:--- |:--- |
| Dates | Observed: |
| Reverse | Inscription | Dates Observed: Reverse Inscription oy

## Inscription Corrupted Hegire dete over of "Khan" $$ ('Pl = 1304 $$ tesyes Inscription Inscription

# ONG" Inscription
# a

Type 5 Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription 13 Inscription BX fom FUR Ue)

fo \| يرو‎ REN فو‎ سس‎ Lawrie Opry ‏LS امسا Thi Type \> Obverse - - teverse  Inscription Inscription as type b as type a Dates Observed:

Type \_d Obverse - - keverse  Inscription 13 semua anes: عم‎ type b 372 1 ie on

# 1344 م‎ رب‎

Type \_ ع‎ Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription Inscrintion

7s type b G5 ey Dates Observed: 6 1346 (:, runee) " " (+ rupec) " ل‎ (1/8 rupee ) mene

Mohammed Sa'adat Ali Khan( 1349-1366 AH - 1930 -1947 AD)

# cLAss

II kK Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription Inscription 16 © © ¢ ee oe f Oke ر‎ f Dates ~~~ 1, SP rer با‎ Observed:

(Within approx. 5 years these coins were withdrawn from circulation), --- Copper Coins --- Tonk mint.

Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan (1284-1349 AH - 1867-1930 AD) CLASS IV.F. Obverse - - Reverse Inscription ee - - We. as CLASS II.i. Type c Dates Observed:

## CLASS 11.6. Type a Obverse - - keverse  Inscription i

## ale \|

# Dates PLEA,

## Observed. IN لو‎ LZ

## Type b Obverse - - teverse  Inscription

## لو‎ IAAL Dates عل‎ Observed: اساسا‎ Type \_c Obverse - - heverse  Inscription 20 og type b Detes Observed: acl

£ IV H No coins of this class have been observed.

CLASS IV a Type a سبي‎ - - Re ere  Inscription 22

# Dates <r 7 4 Observed: aoe

# روا ور ا

# J as CLAS 11.ناه‎ Type c Inecrivtion Inscription as type abut no sword Inscription 21 os type b out date above "Bahedur" Inscription 23 --- - \\4-- Type \_b Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription 22

# Dates ار‎ Observed: Bis Type \_¢ - - Reverse  Inscription 22

# Clo

# Dates Path Observed: Type 8 Obverse leverse Ins eription 22

# fe \| Dates f Observed: Type \_¢ Obverse Reverse Inscription 22

## Dates f oi Observed: Type f Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription 25

## tyre Bee Dates iol Observed: "tig ٠ Inscription 2 3 as type a Inscription 24 over هوه‎ Inscription 26

# ie‏ و0 eS ‏7 ‏M2
## ~\{\> Type عم‎ Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription 13 as © 15358511. ٠ type © Dates Observed: Inscription 13 Type h Obverse as class II.H. type d Dates Observeds Type i Obverse Inscription 13

# AF

# Dates 1 م‎ qref لو‎ Observed: - - poe -\_-

Mohammed Sa'adat Ali Khan (1349-1366 AH - 1950-1947 AD)

CLASSIV K Type a Obverse - - Reverse  Inscription size: 26 mm (machine struck) see Yeomen 2

Dates Observed: Mintage: 640.000 (Calcutta mint

Type b Obverse - - neverse  Inscription 28 size: 21 mm (machine struck) as type a see Yeoman 3 Dates Observeds

## (Actually struck in 1934) Mintage: 640.000 (Calcutta Mint) Inscrintion as class II.!!. type © Inscription 27

# chy we م‎ ar Inscription 27 as type h

## Inscription Inscription as type a
# CLASS V. Tola weirhts of 'fonk. Type a Obverse 5-5 Reverse In: cription 30

# ae,

## mT سس‎

## Dates ١ Observed: 3 سسب‎ (2 tola) Type b Obverse - - keverse  Inscription 31

# سا‎ Dates Observed: --- (1 tole) Type ¢ Obverse --- lteverre Inscription 392 OE ra iA الول ظ‎ Observed: Inscription - blank Inscription - blank Inscrintion = Coet of Arms --- Inscription Transliteration: Translation Inscription: Transliterations Translation Inscription $ Transliterations Translation Inscription Transliteration: Translation Inscription $ Transliteration: Translation: Inscription Transliterations Translation Inscription Transliteration: Translation $$ « t7= $$ List of Inscriptions.

# ٠ SELB blr lois ee

Mohammed Akbar Shah Bad Shah (Gazi) Sahib Qiran Sani Sikka Mubarak

Auspicious coin of the Emperor Mohammed Shah Second Lord of the Fortunate Conjunction of Planets

# Yo د‎ Sr, SIL et Maimanat Manus Jalus Zarb Sironj Sanah

Struck at Sironj in the year.... of Accession associated with Prosperity

# 3 Yb yop WRAL ةجررل \| حضر ‎ bbb

Ahdi Malikah Muayam Sultanat Rafi'ud-darajah Victoria, Zarb Sironj. Sanah...

In the time of the Honoured ruler the realm, Her Exalted

# Highness Victoria, struck at Sironj in''the year...., Abdo J! اللل‎ deity Fe Nasrat Jang Bahadur Mohammed Wazir Khan Al-Mulk Al-Davlah Amir

Brave, Victorious in War Mohammed Wazir Khan Prince of the Kingdom

# 5 FYI الل الروله‎ Je Wyte صولت‎ Sowlat Jang Bahadur Nawab Mohammed Ali Khan Al-Mulk Al-Dawulah Wazir

Brave, Furious in War, Nawab Mohammed Ali Khan

# Wazir of the Kingdom دملا تقو للست كنال وقيصات رزب Y Ex‏ 6

Ahdi Malikah Muazam Sultanat Inglistan wa Qaiser Hind

Zarb Sironj, Sanah eee.:(In the) time of the Honoured ruler of the realm England and

Empress of India struck at Sironj in the year ه..ه‎

# 7 SF AVILA GLA jas زراز‎ Sel

## Sikka Mubarak Zad Az Fazl Yazdan (Mohammed) كع‎ Ali Khan

Auspicious coin struck by the grace of God, (Mohammed) Ibrahim Ali Khan

(Notes The name "Mohammed" isnot vise on the coins concerned but most probably is a part of the inscription). --- Inscription Transliterations Translations Inscription Transliterations Translation Inscription Transliterations Translation Inscription \} Transliteration: Translation Inscription Transliteration: Translation: Inscription Transliterations Translation: Inscription \} Transliterations Translation Inscription Transliterations Translation

# ٠. ‏tniL لالمس سكو كنود بادأ ول رامت لوك

Bi'ahdi Malikah Muazam Sultanat Queen Victoria, Dar-ul-riasat Tonk

In the time of the Honoured ruler of the realm Queen Victoria,

# Seat of Government Tonk, ee tl Bex ارريزضفزارز‎ Su Sikka Mubarak Zad Az Fazl Yazdan Ra-ees Tonk Ibrahim Ali Khan

Auspicious coin struck by the grace of God, Chief of Tonk, Ibrahim Ali Khan

+: a: وه د‎ 5 عد ملأ نظو لنت ككل:نال 385 وسرزال وال ب‎

Ahdi Malikah Muanam Sultanat Inglistan wa Qaiser Hindustan, Dar-ul-Zarb Tonk

(In the) time of the Honoured ruler of the realm England and Empress of India, Seat of the mint Tonk

# 11 cat 4 tos Db tas; Ai go Drs

Ahdi Malikah Muayjam Inglistan wa Qaiser Hind, Dar-ul-Zarb Tonk

(In the( time of the Honoured ruler of England and Empress of India, Seat of the mint Tonk

# 12 A ti, وبع‎ \_IA\_\_ aL oe

Bi'ahdi Malikah Muagam Sultanat Inglistan wa Qaiser Hind, Zarb Tonk

In the time of the Honoured ruler of the realm England and Empress of India, struck at Tonk

Bi'ahdi Malik Muazam Sultanat Inglistan wa Qaiser Hind, George Pancham Zarb Tonk

In the time of the Honoured ruler of the realm England and Emperor of India George Fifth struck at Tonk

# 14 Ne لوك لواب ابر\[ م‎ Sox زرازفض ل‎ SVL

Sikka Mubarak Zad Az Fazl Yazdan Tonk Nawab Ibrahim Ali Khan

Auspicious coin struck by the grace of God, Nawab of Tonk,

# Ibrahim Ali Khan حسام oe A‏ عيب نوتف 15 Mua am Qaiser Shah George Pancham, Zarb Tonk

The Honoured King Emperor George: V struck at ''onk --- » Inscription

# 16 لواب‎ See a

Transliteration/Translation: Mohammed Sadat Ali Khan, Nawab Inscription Transliteration: Translation Inscription Translation Inscription Translation Inscription Transliterations Translation Inscription: Translation Inscription Transliteration: Translation Inscription: 23

# be le الا ار‎ Akbar Shah Bad Shah Gazi Emperor Akbar Shah, fighter of infidels

# gly Oa LE Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan Bahadur Ahdi Malikah Muauam Inglistan, Zarb Tonk Sironj

(In the) time of the Honoured ruler of England, struck at Tonk

# \*. 72 ' ونان‎

Ali Khan Wali 520 ea 7 ع‎ ae Bi'ahdi Malik ancham Qaiser Hind uanam George

In the time of the Honoured ruler George V Emperor of India

# bS EO ‏FUR عزب ترك

Transliteration: Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan Wali, Zarb Tonk

Translation: Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan Wali, struck at Tonk

# Inscription: لؤاب قيب لياش‎ I NA RY Translation: Ibrahim Ali Khan, Wali Nawab, struck at Tonk

# Inscription 3 25 7! \| A nf Oe لم‎ siya

Transliteration: Bi'ahdi Malik Muayam George Pancham Qaiser Hind Sanah 1917 Paw anna

Translation: In the time of the Honoured ruler Emperor of India George V Year 1917 4 anna

# ولررعببا

\| "لا معان صاحب باد روا ى توك 62: ‏noitpircsnI

Transliteration: Bi'ahdi Nawab Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan Sahib Bahadur Wali Tonk

Translation: In the time of Nawab Mohammed Ibrahim Ali Khan Sahib Bahadur Wali --- Insoription Transliterations Translation ل‎ Inscription Transliteration: Translation Inscription Transliteration: Translation Inscription Transliteration: Translation: Inscription Inscription: Transliteration: Translation Nawab Wali Hiz Hainess Ibrahim Ali Khan Nawab Wali His Highness Ibrahim Ali Khan Margins

## In circle W4"; J below leaf. (S late و‎

Margins Bi'ahdi Malikah Muazam Qaiser Hind - George Pancham In circles Eek pai below leaf: Sanah Iswy 1923!952

Margins In the time of the Honoured ruler Emperor of India - George V In circle: one paisa

below leafmarks: In the Christian year 1923 Igg2

# 29 Margins Liye, pyle )لاؤعتر‎ KAU be

## In circle: below coat of Arms PO ال‎

Margins Hiz Hainess Nawab Mohammed Sa'adat Ali Khan Sahib Bahadur, Wali riasat Tonk In circles: Sanah Hijri 1350 Margins: His Highness Nawab Mohammed Sa'adat

Ali Khan Sahib Bahadur, Sovereign of the State, Tonk In circles The year 1350 Hejira

# re م لولع‎ otras Riasat Tonk, 2 Tola, 1303 Government of Tonk, 2 Tola, 1303

As inscription as 39 but 1 Tola instead of 2 Tola KA ok وزن‎ yp t3 Tonk Darbar Wazan 2 Tola, 1308

Court of Tonk Weight 2 Tola, 1308