# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY January 1980

# INFORMATION SHEET NO. 22 Early Arab Coins of Tunisia The Hafsid - AH 627-982 (1230-1574 AD) by M.L. Tarizzo Historical Background

At the beginning of the 7th century of the Hijra (13th century AD) most of northwestern Africa - the Maghreb - was nominally subject to the

the Almohad Caliph whose power however was being undermined by Christian pressure in the Iberian peninsula and by unrest in North Africa. The tendency of the Maghreb to divide into three parts, noted throughout most of its recorded history, was evident also under the Almohads and eventually three Berber dynasties became

established, the Hafsids in the east, in Ifriqtyah, the 'Abd-alWadids in the central part and the Marinids in the west.

IN AH 604/1206 AD the Almohad Caliph Muhammad al-Nasir had appointed as Governor of Ifriqiyah, abu Muhammad 'Abd al-Wahid,

son of abu Hafs 'Umar, one of the early supporters of 'Abd al-Mumin, the first Almohad Caliph. 'Abd al-Wahid established his capital in Tunis and was succeeded in 618/1222 by his elder son abu Faris who was deposed in 625/1228 by his own brother abu Zakariya Yahya (1)\*. The latter gradually severed his ties with the Almo. hads and is considered to be the founder of the Hafsid dynasty. The period of transition stretched over several years but historical evidence points to 627/1230 as the beginning of independent Hafsid rule, and the cotns of the Hafsid style but with the names of al-Mahdi

and of 'Abd al-Mumin are assigned to this period.

The Hafsids considered themselves as the spiritual heirs and successors of the Almohads and soon became the most influential of the western islamic dynasties of their period, expanding their control westwards and forcing the 'Abd-al~Wadids to pay tribute.

Abu Zakariya Yahya was succeeded by his son Muhammad (2)\* who assumed the Caliphal title of Amir al-Mu'minin and the name of al-Mustansir. Following the fall of Baghdad to the Mongols in 656/1258 and the collapse of the eastern Caliphate, al-Mustansir was recognised as Caliph by the Sharif of Mecca and Medina in 657/

1259 and possibly by the Mamluks of Egypt in 658/1260. This reunification of the Caliphate was of short duration and the 'Abbasid Caliphate was reestblished in 659/1261 in Cairo by the Mamluk Sultan Baybars who set up an 'Abbasid who alsoand confusingly took the name al-Mustansir.

When the house of Anjou came to power in Sicily in 663/1265, the Hafsid al-Mustansir held back the tribute which the previous rulers of Ifrtqiyah had paid to the Normans and the Honenstaufens, and which had contributed to a relative balance of power in the region. In an attempt to assert his rights Charles I of Anjou King of Sicily, enlisted the help of his brother Louis IX of France and the fleet and troops which had been assembled for the Eighth Crusade were diverted to North Africa, where they landed near Carthage in 669/1270.

\* The numbers given in brackets after the names يي‎ the rulers are those of Table 1 and Fig. l. --- $$ = $$ Ze

This expedition came to an abrupt end, short of a decisive victory, when Louis IX died of the plague in Carthage in 669/1270. However,

Charles of Anjou obtained the payment of a heavier tribute together with trade and settlement rights for the Christians, in recognition of al-Mustansir's right to control the region.

Al-Mustansir's death was followed by a period of unrest until Khalid (8), Hafsid ruler of Bougie in the west reunifed under his rule all the Hafsid possessions in 709/1309. The control exercised

° by. the central power gradually declined and a growing role was again played by nomad Arabs; different parts of the region being under the intermittant rule of various Hafsid contestants. Moving in from the south-east, abu Yahya Zakariya (11) occupied Tunis, executed Khalid and proclaimed himse Caliph. He was in turn chased to the south by Abu Bakr(10) who moved in from the west. Abu Bakr restored order with the help of the Marinids and of the Bani Solaim from the south.

Following the death of Abu Bakr in 747/1346, further revolts led to another intervention by the Marinids who occupied Tunis in 748/1347 and came to control the etitire Maghreb, as the Almohads had before them. Separate Hafsid rule over eastern and central Maghreb was eventually restored by Ahmad (17), a Hafsid prince established in Bougie and Constantine, who in 772/1370 occupied Tunis with the help of the Ottoman sultan and reigned there till

796/1394. His son 'Abd al-'Aziz (19) was followed by Muhammad (20) and by 'Uthman (21) during whose long reign Hafsid rule was conslidated in the face of persistent conflicts on the western border. Active trade was established with the East, with the Italian republics and with Aragon. After 'Uthman, there was a rapid succession of Hafsid rulers and again unrest and gradual decline of the central power under the pressure of rebel nomads and in parallel with the strengthening of the Ottoman Empire

By 900/1495 the littoral towns of the "Barbary coast" had become practically autonomous republics living off piracy at sea with the more or less open support of the Ottomans. Around 916/ 1510 the Hafsid Caliph Muhammad (25) came to terms with Khayr alDin Barbarossa and appointed him Governor of Djerba, thus recognising his de -facto independence. However, Khayr 32-12 moved from Djerba to Algiers where his brother Aruj had established

a principality. From there and with the help of the Ottomans, he occupied Tunis in 941 proclaiming the sovereignty of the Ottomans. Mohammad, the Hafsid ruler, fled to Spain where he enlisted the

help of the Emperor Charles V who personally led a fleet carrying Spanish, German, Portuguese and Genoese soldiers and occupied Tunis in 942/1535.

Muhammad was reinstated, but as a vassal seconded by a Spanish Governor and was obliged to pay an annual tribute of 12,000 ducats. With the help of the Genoese Admiral Andrea Doria, he again took control over most of the coastal area but the

interior, including Kairouan, remained under the control of nomad Arabs «x In 948/1542 Muhammad was deposed by his son Ahmad (27) who tried to play off Spaniards and Ottomans against each other. During his reign, Dragut, an independent corsair operating out of Mahdia, was appointed Ottoman Governor of Tripoli and occupied

Gafsa and Kairouan. The ruler of Algiers, Uluj Ali, moved east, Chased out the Hafsid ruler and placed a Governor in Tunis in 977/1569. --- ته 3

In the meantime, Spain and Venice had allied themselves against the Ottomans. John of Austria, brother of Philip II of Spain, occupied Tunis again in 981/1573 and installed there the Hafsid Muhammad (28) brother of Ahmad. However, shortly afterwards the Ottomans led by Sinan Pasha and with the help of local rulers from the south and the west reoccupied Tunis. The last of the Hafsid rulers was taken prisoner to Istanbul and Tunisia became an Ottoman protectorate for the next three centuries.

Fig. 1. Hafsid genealogy (adapted from Hazard)

Only rulers of the eastern Maghreb are included, identified by Hazard's serial numbers

## abu وي‎

## "Abd al-Wahid \{

## q abu Faris (1) ee

## (2) (4) (6). xhmad i \{ \| (3) Yahya (11)

## f ' i (4A) ه1-5501‎ )0( (8) (10) (12) Fi i (13) (15) Muhammad (16) (17) i (19) Muhammad

## (20) (2 1)

## Muhammad Ibrahim

## (23) ع )22( )25( (24)

## )26( (27) (28) --- Hazard No.

# WN F

(1) H.W. Hazard The Numismatic Histor of Late Medieval North Africa ANS 000 Studies No. New York 1952. Table l.

# AH 627-647 647-675 675-678 677-681 681-683

## 683-694 694-709 709-711 711-717 717-723 718-747 747-748 748-749 749-751 751-770 755-796 796-37 837-839 839-893 893-894 894-895 895-899 899-932 932-941 941-942 942-948 948-977 977-981 981-982

(1) Hafsid Rulers of Tunisia (adapted from Hazard)

# AD 1230-1249 1249-1277 1277-1279 1279-1283 1282-1284 1284-1295 1295-1309 - 1309-1311 1311-1318 1317-1323 1318-1346 1346-1347 1347-1348 1348-1350 1350-1369 1354-1394 1394-1434 1434-1435 1435-1488 1488-1489 1489-1490 1490-1494 1494-1526 1526-1534 1534-1535 1535-1542 1542-1569 1569-1573 1573-1574 Name

## abu Sakariya Yahya ibn 'Abd al Wahid abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn Yahya abu Zakariya Yahya ibn Muhammad abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Yahya

Ahmad ibn Marzuq, pretending to be abu'l 'Abbas al-Fadl abu Hafs 'Umar ibn Yahya abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn Yahya abu'l Baga Khalid ibn Yahya abu Yahya Zakariya ibn Ahmad abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn Zakariya abu Yahya Abu Bakr ibn Yahya abu Hafs 'Umar ibn Abu Bakr Marinid interregnum abu'l 'Abbas al-Fadl ibn Abu Bakr abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Abu Bakr abu'l 'Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad abu Faris 'Abd 31-2212 ibn Ahmad abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn Muhammad abu 'Amr 'Uthman ibn Muhammad abu Zakariya Yahya ibn Muhammad. abu Muhammad 'Abd al-Mumin ibn Ibrahim abu Yahya Zakariya ibn Yahya abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn al-Hasan abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn Muhammad occupation by Khayr al-Din Barbarossa

Restoration of Muhammad as vassal of Charles I of Spain abu'l Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad Ottoman interegnum

abu 'Abdallah Muhammad ibn Muhammad, vassal of Philip II of Spain --- General Description of the Coins

The majority of the Hafsid coins which have been preserved are gold coins, possibly due to the intrinsic value and to the fact that gold was readily available for minting from trade connections with lands south of the Sahara. Numismatic and historical, evidence in respect of the rare silver and copper coins is limited to two periods only; between AH 647 and 711 (1249-1311AD) and from AH 948/1542 AD to the end of the period of Hafsid rule, the latter series already showing Ottoman influence. No coins are known to have been struck by the numerous independent rulers who controlled different parts of the region in the period between 893/1488 and the end of the Hafsid rule. Gold Coins

The Hafsid coins are similar to those struck by the Almohads (see ONS Information Sheet No. 18, July 1977). Their legends are partially within a square inscribed in a circle, and partially in the four segments. Unlike the Almohad coins in which the square consists of two continuous lines, the square on the Hafsid coins typically has 3 lines, two solid ones and a beaded one in between.

With the exception of one double dinar of Ahmed (17) and of Marinid coins struck in Tunis during this period,all central

legends consist of three lines. The script used is normally a cursive Naskhi, but ornamental Kufi has been used in some cases. The le gends in the segments usually follow a constant sequence,

starting at the top, and following anti-clockwise in the left, bottom and right segments. None of the gold coins bear any date and their attribution depends solely on the legends which, apart from the early coins of this series, always give the name of the Amir, his antecedents and his descendants, and usually his titles.

Double dinars, dinars, half, quarter and eighth dinars are known, the denominations being determined by their weight. Many of the coins omit the name of the mint. This paper includes those coins without mint=-names but issued by the Hafsid rulers of Tunisia. Tunis is the commonest mint name found but coins are also known from Qafsah, al-Hamma, Tuzar and Mahdiyah (see Table 2). Coins struck by Hafsid rulers outside Tunisia are not dealt with here but are known from the mints of Bijayah, Tilimsan, Jaza'ir, Qusantinah, Biskirah, Tanas, Sabtah, Sijimasah and Tarabulus and from the Spanish mints of Ishbiliyah and Gharnatah.

When present the mint name is almost always on the reverse, beneath the legend inside the square, usually in small characters. Of the coins described here, only the double dinar issued by

Ibrahim (16) at Gafsa and the double dinars issued in Tunis by the Marinids have the mint-name on the obverse.

Taken as a whole, these coins show a certain uniformity in the disposition and contents of the kgends, after the changes which took place during the reign of abu Zakariya Yahya (1),

founder of the dynasty, and which reflect his gradual breaking away from the Almohad influence and tradition.
## 

Starting in 634/1226, the name.of the Amir appears in the reverse segments of the coins issued by Yahya. His coins also show the name of the Almohad Caliph 'Abd al-Mumin in the central legend of the reverse up to 640/1242. From 640/1242 onwards the name of the Almohad Caliph is replaced by religious legends.

For the rest of the series the basic arrangement of the legends is as follows, with some minor variations:

Obverse, field: religious kegends, including invocation to al=Mahdi Obverse segments: Reverse, field: Reverse segments:

religious legends, including the "bismillah" and the ""kalimah", with minor variations in their wording name of the Amir

religious legends and the names and titles of the Amir Examples of Typical Religious Legends Double Dinar Obverse tield Obverse segments ' Dinar Obverse field Obverse segments

Thanks be to God & الله ظ‎ the might and the strength WL والقوة‎ Joh lo are in God al-Mahdi is the vicar of God AM) \| sala Sot!

## In the name of God the mercifulpsrs الله ال حيء, ال.‎

aw the compassionate $$ a = 3 j: $$ God bless our lord Muhammad تسبح نأ تا‎ de الله‎ vo there is no God but God الا الله‎ UY

# Muhammad is the apostle of God جر رسور الله‎

## Thanks be to God هلل‎ ركشل ١ ‎

\| al-Mahdi ai seb is the virar of God Asia Your لهلم‎ ٍ God is one y>lo 4! there is no god but He هوه‎ Vial لد‎ the merciful and compassionate حدم‎ --- on ة‎,. 0

## = dinar -3 grams x

Table 2. Hafsid Gold Coins assumed to originate from the area now called Tunisia Denominations 2d, d, 4d, (1) Yahya - Birst Series 627-14 In the name of 'Abd al

Mumin as amir al-muminip. x x 2nd Series 634-640 Yahya's name added as amir

al-ajal x 3rd Series 640-647 Omitting 'Abd al Mumin amir al-muminin x x

(2) Muhammad First Series 647~650 as amir 31-1 x 2nd Series 650-675 as amir al-muminin, alMustansir bi'Allah al-Mansur bi'fadl Allah x

(3) Yahya al-Wathigq bi-Allah al- Muayad bi-fadl Allah

(4) Ibrahim as amir al-ajal, alMujahid fi sabil Allah x (4A) Ahmad Marzuq, imposter, pretending

to be al-Fadl and using his name ae al-Mansur bi-fadl Allah alQaim bi-haq Allah

(6) 'Umar al-Mustansir bi-Allah al-Muayad bi-nasr Allah

)7( Muhammad al-Mustansir bi-Allah al-Mansur bi-fadl Allah xT

(8) Khalid al-Nasir li-din Allah alMansur bi-fadl Allah P 3

(10) Abu Bakr al-Mutawakil 'ala Allah al-Muayad bi-nasr Allah xQ x (ll) Zakariya al-Qaim bi-nasr Allah al-Mansur bi-fadl Allah x

Q2) Muhammad oe. 51-1133214... (rest illegible) x

(13) 'Umar al-Nasir li-din Allah al-Mansur bi-fadl Allah x - - Marinid interregnum. No names, no

titles. Ziyanid type inscriptions on 5 horizontal lines in central square on obverse and reverse

(15) 31-1 al-Mutawakil 'ala Allah al-Muayad bi-nasr Allah Xx

Mints: x = no mint, T = Tunis, Q = Qafsah, H = al-Hammah, M Mahdiyah, Tz = Tuzar --- Table 2. (Continued) Denominations 2d d, Weight

Ibrahim al-Mustansir bi-Allah alMansur bi-fadl Allah

al-Mutawakil 'ala Allah al-Muayad bi-nasr Allah (H-609: Marinid influence legends in central squares on 5 horizontal lines) 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Mutawakil 'ala Allah al-Muayad bi-nasr Allah al-Mujahid fi sabil

## 6) xQ (17) Ahmad (19) l sd, wir 2 dinar 4.7¢223,1«62,0.6, 0.3 grams Allah QTH,xTQM,x

(20) Muhammad al-Mustansir bi-Allah alMuayad bi-nasr Allah x

(21) 'Uthman al-Mutawakil 'ala Allah wahdihi: تي ياب‎ XS (25) Muhammad al-Mutawakil 'ala.... (rest illegible) x

(26) Nuhammad (mostly illegible)...alsultan... x

Table 3. -Hafsid gold coins from mints excluded from this paper Ruler Double dinars Dinars (1) Yahya Bijayah Tilimsan Jaza'ir "Sabtah Sijilmasah Ishbiliyah (2) Muhammad Bijayah Bijayah (6) Uthman Bijayah

## \*® (6A) Yahya (\*) no mint Bijayah (10) Abu Bakr Bijayah. Qusantinah

## (15)

al-Fadl Bijayah Tarabulus (15A) 'Abd al-Rahman'\*) - gusantinah (15B) Muhammad (\*) no mint (16) Ibrahim Rarayaa.s

(19) "Abd al-'Aziz Bijayah Qusantinah Biskirah Tarabulus --- Table 3. (Continued) Ruler Double Dinars Dinars

\| \\ جمهور ١ ‎ tara )\*( ner Bijayah (21) 'Uthman Tilimsan Jaza'ir Wain auc ts: Qusantinah: Tanas Tarabulus Tarabulus (\*) Amir at Bijayah (X) Amir at Qusantinah

## 2. Silver Coins

Anonymous square silver dirhams. are known, similar to those of the Almohads, but with the legends in ornamented Kufi script. Some of these coins have the mint-name "Tunis" beneath the reverse legend and were probably struck by the Hafsids between AH 650 and 711. Their size is 25 x 29 mm for the double dirham and 14 x 16 for the dirham; their weight is approximately 3.5 and 1.7 grams respectively. The legends are:

## Obverse

There is no god but God \|. الله‎ DS لذ اه‎ the whole commandment unto God رمالا كله لله‎ there is no strength but in God هللاب‎ Yi لل كو‎ Reverse Allah is our Lord lu الله ر‎

## Muhammad is our prophet LO رسيو‎ YO al-Mahdi our leader lio I sya \|

The only Hafsid ruler to whom silver coins can be attributed is Ahmad (27). No gold coins issued by him are known, and his Silver and copper coins (see below) reflect the Ottoman influence. The silver coins are dated, in numerals, and the recorded dates range from 952 to 964 AH (1545-1557 AD).. All ep coins have "Tunis" as mint-name. Their legends are as Ollows:- Square double dirham 956 AH (1549 AD).

## Obverse

There is no god but God; Muhammad yoo 41. DID 'is the apostle of God; the commandment عر‎ Yl ول الله‎ whole unto God; there is no strength buty  ١ 98 Sy array im God; al-Mahdi is the vicar of God)atuls ee \} aul Reverse At the command power servant of Godfgib\| الله‎ ues je رم‎ نع ١ ‎ al-Mutawakil

## ' 313 Allah our prince

iy so الله‎ the Sultan Ahmad illustrious may عز‎ Som! wo BLED year (9) 56 OT Ab his victory be; struck in Tunis jy xe Ypo 0 نصر‎ ح

# eo --- Square dirhams ot; - به‎ Recorded dates (9)52, )9754, (9)55, (9)58, 3. Obverse Reverse

# 961, 964 AH (1545-1557 AD)

## And whoever relies upon be Hse ومن‎

God then he is his sufficiency. Aya فهو‎ ads \| verily God is attaining his commandment «\_,o! أن اله بالغ‎ At the command of our prince Gy عن أمر مو‎ the Sultan Ahmad illustrious may عز‎ doo! السطان‎ his victory be; struck the year OO صرب‎ (date) ae

## بو درس ‏sinuT Copper Coins

Rare copper coins of this period attributed to Ahmad are known to exist. Their diameter is 15 to 18 mm and their weight approximately 2.5 grams; They have legends on two or three lines surrounded by arabesques. Type 1. Obverse Reverse Type 2 Obverse Reverse

## bi-amr

\_yol Allah الله‎ Tunis نس‎ \_p abu al-'Abbas ce ابو ارعلا‎ Ahmad. May his victory:: نصر ه‎ jE oe! be illustrious

## Illustrious may. 9 عدر‎ his victory be; struck سم‎ ee. نصره‎ in Tunis بكو تمسر‎

## abu ابو‎

al-'Abbas بس‎ Lx) \| Ahmad So)