# May 1977 ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

# INFORMATION SHEET No. 17

# SURVEY OF COINAGE IN BURMA SINCE THE 18TH CENTURY By Lewis A Shaw

Coins for everyday transactions are a comparatively moderm idea in Burma, CHINA (Yunnan)

# UPPER \} BURMA

# MANDALAY

# AMARAPURA

# ARAKAN & TENASSERIM

# ANNEXED IN

# LOWER BURMA

# KN ANNEXED iN 1852 I UPPER BURMA

# ANNEXED IN 1886 © (© 3e0 400 S00 \| Kicomerres

having been introduced there less than 200 years ago. This note attempts to outline the development of the coinage and to list the coins produced for use in Burma from that time to the present date.

# BODAWPAYA (1781-1819) Negrais, British Resident was establi

# BURMA Showing STAGES OF ANNEXATION 1826-86

Bodawpaya, a son of the founder of the Alaungpaya Dynasty, took the throne in February 1781 following the murder of the previous King, his nephew Singu, and in order to eliminate all opposition he immediately murdered all his rivals, their wives, children and servants. At that time his King-

dom comprised much the same area as present day Burma with the exception of Arakan, which separated by a range of hills, had been an independent Kingdom for centuries. Until Bodawpaya's time, there were no coins

for general use throughout Burma, although there had been local issues, notably in Arakan by the Chandra Dynasty, 4-6th Century, the Pyu-Mon series in South East Burma, 2-5th Century and a later series in Arakan in the 17-18th Century. (Refs 1, 2 and 3). This later Arakan series, well documented by Phayre, (Ref 3, pp 5-11) came to an end in 1784-5 when Bodawpaya took over the Kingdom of Arakan during a time of turmoil. The last coins of this series were issued in Arakan by the Burmese Governor installed by Bodawpaya, the inscription on them reading '1146 (= 1784 AD) Amarapura, Kingdom of the Lord of many White Ele-

phants" (Ref 3 p11). They were struck in gold and silver, both with Similar inscriptions, the larger having 8 wide striated rim. These then were the first coins issued by Bodaw-

paya, though their use was probably restricted to Arakan.

Trade between Burma and the East India Company had ceased following the massacre by the Burmese in 1759, of most of the British in the trading post at a island at the South West point of the Irrawaddy delta, but a

## shed in Rangoon in 1796 as a result or a successful --- an

mission from the Governor General of India to the Burmese Government in Ava in 1975, and the way was again open for Trade with the British.

All Trade and Bazaar purchases up to this time were carried out by barter or by weighing out lumps of metal, usually silver or lead, both of which were available in Burma, although since Europeans had been trading in Burmese ports for about two centuries, some of this metal will have been from European and EIC coins. Bodawpaya saw the need for coins of his own, and although he may have been experimenting in his capital Ava, the evidence for his coinage is unclear. It is certain however that he gave patterns to Captain Cox, the British Resident, to take to Calcutta to have trial coins struck (Ref 3 p 35, Ref 4 pp 13-16). He also asked Cox to procure minting equipment for him. The patterns given to Cox appear to have been siler pieces similar in design to the Pyu-Mon coins, and copper pieces with the simple design of two fishes one above the other. The reverses of the copper coins carried an inscription in Burmese giving the date of Bodawpaya's accession, 1143 BE (=1781 AD). Cox returned from Calcutta in 1797 with 20,000 silver and 100,000 copper coins, together with the minting machinery, which Bodawpaya used to strike more coins. Unwisely he issued them at a taken value, about one quarter of their real value. Aftera very short time the people reverted to their lumps of silver and lead, and

Bodawpaya was forced to withdraw the coins. Temple (Ref 4 pp 14-15) suggests that coins with the two fishes design were minted in silver, as well as in three denominations, values unknown, in copper. Although specimens of the coppers exist today, there appear to be none in silver, and even in Temple's time (18°90) he says that none of the silver pieces appear to have survived.

Vum Ko Hau, who has in his collection some of the silver coins similar to the Pyu-Mon patterns, refers to them as "Ava's'", though he gives no explanation for the use of the name (Ref 11 pp 253-4).

# BAGYIDAW (1891-37), THARAWADDY (1837-46), and PAGAN (1846-53).

Bodawpaya died in 1819, and was succeeded by his grandson, Bagyidaw. No evidence is apparent of any coinage during Bagyidaw's reign, but there is a record of a silver coin of his successor, King Tharawaddy (1837-46), depicting the moon and a hare on the obverse, and a lotus on the reverse. (Ref 5 vp 37).

Bagyidaw's reign was beset with frontier problems which led to the '1st Anglo-Burmese War, (1824-26), and as a result, he was forced to give up Arakan and Tenasserin, two large coastal provinces. He did however retain his three chief ports, Bassein, Rangoon and Martaban.

Temple (Ref 4 p 17) records that King Pagan (1846-53) also tried to force

a token currency, but gives no details, It may be that these coins were those referred to by Barrelto (Ref 5) as silver coins with the Shwepyizoe Bird on the obverse, and the date in the Buddhist Eta 2390 (=1846 AD) on the reverse.

# MINDON (1853-78)

King Mindon deposed his mad brother Pagan in February 1853, at the end of the 2nd Anglo-Burmese War (1852-3) and was humiliated to have to surrender the Province of Pegu to the British, who then occupied the whole of Lower

Burma, including Arakan and Tenasserim. He therefore ruled a much depleted Upper Burma which had no access to the sea except through British held territory.
# PS. Ue

British Lurma, as Lower burma was then known, was administered from India, and sustained a considerable army, apart from numerous British and Indian traders, ali of whom were using the current Indian coins.

une of the earliest coins of Mindon may have been a large silver piece now in the british Museum, which is 39 mm diameter, and weighs 10.45 grams,

ie 1 Kyat or Tical weight. This coin has the simple design of a standin, bird facing right on the obverse, and the date in the "urmese "sra of the Noble Religion 2369" (= 1853 AD) on the reverse. It is suggested that this bird is the Shwepyizoe bird (common Iora), for it clearly resembles that bird as illustrated in "The sirds of Burma" (Ref 6). The date however, is the accession ycar of King Mindon, and the coin may therefore be attributed to him. 11 Barrelto is correct in attributing the Shwepyizoe Bird to King -.gan, it would a,pear that both Pagan and Mindon used the same emblem, which is unusual. The author would appreciateany information which readers may have to clarify this.

Colonel Yule records that Mindon had no coinage in 1655 (Ref 7 p 258), but tnere is evidence from the Birmingham mint records that in order to establish a regular coinage for circulation in Upper Burma, Mindon arranged to build a new mint in the new city of Mandalay which he had founded in 1857. The minting machinery was supplied by Ralph Heaton and Sons of Birmingham in 1865 and was

erected under the direction of one of their foremen. The mint was formally opened on an auspicious date chosen by the 20381 Astrologers, the 9th day of the waning, moon in the month of Tazuangbom (November) 1865 (Ref &). The coins produced were the gold hyat, quarter kyat and 1 pe with the 'chintne' design,

the well known 'peacock' series in silver, copper coins with a peacock, and lead coins with a hare. A gold 1 Kyat, and two smaller denominations, 1 mu and

pe with the peacock design are also known to exist, but it is suspected that they are restrixes from the dies used for silver coins.

Recent evidence (Kef 9) shows the existence of proof silver peacock coins in the reserve collection of the birmingham mint, but it is not clear if tney were minted in Kirmingham, although Forrer (Ref 10) lists Burma as one of the countries for wiich coins were produced by the Birmingham mint at the time the machinery was Supplied to Mandalay. Uies for the peacock coins are reported to nave been seen in the Calcutta mint in 1945, but no evidence has oeen seen as

to whether surmese coins were iiinted there or whetner the dies nad been ta«xen to Calcutta when the sandalay mint closed.

At least two other silver Kyat coins were minted in the 1060 period, the first depicting a peacock with spread wings and the date 1214 BS (= 1653 4d), and the second depicting a peacock with folded tail, flanked by two floral garlands, and the date 1222 Ba (= 1860 AD). There appears to be no infarmation on the origin of these two silver pieces, though wnether they were issued as coins is in doubt since they each weigh 1 tical, ie about 16 grams, compared to the normal peacock 1 kyat coin weighing 11.5 grams.

The copper coins of Minion are a one quarter pe (equivalent to one Indian pice) with a peacock design and date 1227 BE (1865 AD), and a two pya (equivalent to the indian ¢ Anna), dated 1231 BE (1869 AD) with a chinthe on the obverse. There are said to be iron copies of the 1865 = pe coin, but they are very rare. Temple says they were forced on the people at one third of the, ve, ie they would nave been equivalent to one indian pie (Ref 4 p 45). luindon's lowest denomination coins were in lead and depicted a hare on the obverse, tlie value in burmese on the reverse being quoted as one quarter or one ei hth of the copper coin. It is usually assumed that this refers to the 2 xe --- a Bie

## of 1865.

'They are therefore equivalent to 1/6 and Vp of the pe. The diameter of beth coins is about the same, ie 21-22 mm, but the weight varies considerably,

the /42 pe being foynd at about §& grams and also about 13 grams, which is the same weight as the 6ثر‎ pe.

# THIBAW (1378-85)

King Thibaw, one of Mindon's many sons, succeeded to the throne on his father's death in 1878, amidst considerable intrigue which included his inarriage to Princess Supayalat. Soon after she became queen, she prevailed upon the King to imprison, and ultimately in February 1879 to massacre, about 80 members of the royal family, whom she and her ministers considered a threat to the throne.

The gold issue of King Thibaw filled a gap in Mindon's series, ie a half kyat (or 5 mu). This coin, bearing on the obverse the mythical creature known to the Burmese as the "t6" - half lion and half deer, is dated 1240 BE (1878 AD), the King's accession date. Thibaw also issued a copper 4 pe dated 1240, again with the t6 on the obverse. Brass copies of these exist, on which the designs are much cruder than the original, and which were possibly a token currency

forced on the people by the King. Temple suggests they were made from the waste trimmed from the copper sheets used for the regular coins, alloyed with

yine to make a more easily workable brass (ref 4 p 90).

Relationships between the British and the Burmese had become further strained during Thibaw's reign and eventually led to the 3rd Anglo Burmese war in 1885. 'his was a very brief affair consisting essentially of an unopposed advance by british troovs to Myingyan, 50 miles south west of Mandalay, when

the king surrendered, and the whole of Burma, with the exception of the Shan States, then became under British rule. The Mindon and Thibaw coins remained in circulation for about four years, being withdrawn in 1889 and officially replaced by the Indian coins, which had already been in use in Lower Burma for over thirty years. INDEPENDENT BURMA (1948-present)

Indian coins continued in use throughout Burma for the whole of the period of British rule, except for the Japanese occupation of January 1942 August 1945, but in 1949, following the granting of independence in 1948, a new

series of Burmese coins minted in nickel and copper-nickel by the Royal Mint in London, was put into circulation. The shapes of the indian coins were retained snd a new obverse with a 'chinthe', designed by Paget, was introduced, but the values were given their burmese names, ie instead of the 'anna' and the 'pice',

we have the 've' and the 'pya', the largest coin being the 5 pe, equivalent to a half rupee. The Indian rvpee was not replaced until decimalisation in 1952,

when the Kyat, divided into 100 pya was issued as part of a new cupro-nickel series minted by the Royal Mint.

The dates on the 1949 coins were in Burmese script using the Christian tra, but in 1952 the Burmese Era date was added on the obverse of the 25 pya, 50 pya, 1 kyat coins. This decimal series by the Royal Mint, was produced from 1952 to 1965, but in 1966 a new series with denominations from 1 to 50 pya in aluminium was introduced, with the chinthe replaced by the bust of Aung San, the

Ssurmese leader assassinated in 1947. The author has been unable to obtain any
information concerning the minting of these 1966 coins except that they were not produced by the Royal Mint. After 11 years with no new coins, a cupronickel 1 kyat piece dated 1975, was issued in the FAO series. The author knows of no other coins in recent years.

# COIN DENOMINATIONS

The system of weights in Burma in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries used the 'kyat' (pronounced "We ja.t") aS a main unit, which was identica! to the Siamese 'tical'. There were 100 kyats to 1 viss, which was 3.65 lbs, and thus the kyat was equal to 16.6 grams. It was divided into 20 pe (pronounced 'pai', as 'pair' without the 'r') 10 mu ('moo'), and 5 mat.

Mindon used these units for the coins he introduced in Upper Burma in the 1860's, and as they were a decimal system there were difficulties in makin= thou interchangeable with the Indian coins circulating in Lower Burma where there were

16 annas to one rupee. Nowadays the values of the silver peacock coins are matched to the Indian rupee and anna series as in the following table, but they

may not necessarily have passed at these values in the bazaars. BURMESE VALUE 1 Kyat 5 Mu 1 Mat Mu 1 Pe

# + Ak Fee EAB gee \| \\ VALUE INSCRIBED "

# ON COIN ~ Su:

# INDIAN VALUE = RUPEES ~ $$ /16 (= $$ 1 anna) دادم دعي دامن

The gold coins of the same period were equivalent to the Indian Mohur and its fractions, and were inscribed as for the silver coins above, with the exception of the? gold kyat, which reads ie 2 mu 1 pe, which is 2) mu or i Mohur.

The lower denominations in copper and lead, had their values written out in a rather lengthy word style. These are explained for each coin in the catalogue following these notes.

By 1949, when the coinage for Independent Burma was introduced, the Indian system was abandoned in favour of the burmese units, and we find values in "pe'!' and '"pya" again, instead of "anna" and "pice", there being 64 pya to one kyat, \| just as there were 64 pice to a rupee. In 1952, when the coins were decimalised, the pya was used as the basic unit at 100 pya to one kyat.

# THE BURMESH ERA (BE)

The dating system used in Burma is that instituted by King Popa 3awrahan in AD 638, so that to convert from BE to AD we simply add 638 to the Bz figure. this sometimes gives a date which appears to be one year out, because the

Surmese New Year commences about the middle of April. Some references quote Burmese dates according to the Siamese CS (Chula Sakarat) system. That is in fact the same as the Burmese Era, but was not adopted in Siam until the Burmese occupation of Siam in the 16th century, when it displaced the Maha Sakarat which

dated from 78 AD. The CS system remained in official use in Siam until 1887, but

# Oe hes \| --- ~ 6 «

continues in Burma to this day as the Burmese Era. The Buddhist Era, or "Era of the Noble Religion", dates from the foundation of Buddhism

# BURMESE SCRIPT

In a short paragraph it is only possible to give an elementary Outline of Burmese script, but the following may help readers to

recognise some words and read the values on the coins.

The basis for the script is the short vowel 3 = a, and a series of consonants in which the ''a' is inherent:- TMM ka hka QO or W ga Cc nga 62 sa sO hsa © or oT Za p nya تت‎ ta 00 hta 3 or © da na © pa co hpa wor DD ba لى‎ ma

| Wor © ya | © la | O wa جد‎ | tha | Cy ha |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Vowels are indicated by adding symbols before, after, above or | beneath the consonamts or the inherent vowel. | They may be pure or | nazalised, or have a consonant ending. | ee.g:- |
| 3m) | a | Oo | ma | 3: see |

Vowels are indicated by adding symbols before, after, above or beneath the consonamts or the inherent vowel. They may be pure or nazalised, or have a consonant ending. ee.g:-

## 3m) a Oo ma 3: see

## ¢ Oc oc tan lo § myan ع‎ naing ts taing

## °: © ngan 99: thon كون6‎ daw 3H lok

Space does not permit any more, but the following examples from the coins show the construction of words:-

## c

me tjat (kyat) 50 hsin (elephant) el: nga (five )

## oom

)um( 780060  ( nobanaday )‏yaladnaM( ل ؛ fa nikaht )‏drol( هد

The inscriptions quoted in my list are as inscribed on the coins even though some spellimg is incorrect. In particular it should be noted that the value 'mu' is correctly spelt as a but it sometimes appears as م‎ or &. One Mu is usually abreviated to "4 °

The letter © 'pa' can sometimes be pronounced 'ba', so that for example the value 'pya' should sometimes be 'bya'. Similarly ص‎ ''ta' can be pronounced 'da', and the appropriate form is used in the transliteration.

# ehT srebmun 63 ‏-: شف اديب ‏eC جه جد بيس - إن ‏TS --- Oe. hee

## Notes on the listing of coins in the catalogue

1.  The whole period under review has been divided into shorter periods coincidin,, with the reigns of the monarchs, each having a reference letter. The coins have been listed as far as possible in date order, and numbered sequentiaily.

2.  All weights are in grams, and have been quoted in one of three ways:-

- when only one coin has been examined, the actual weight is given.

- when the weights of several coins is known, and the variation is

small, an average weight is given. E.g. © 10.5 gm.

- where the difference in weight between two or more similar coins is

relatively large, indicating two weight standards, then two weights are given.

3.  Die varieties, if known, are listed using suffixes a, b, c etc with the Same coin reference number. acknowledgements

For practical reasons this survey has been confined to an examination of coins in the Britisn Museum, London, the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge,

the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the collections of several ONS members. The autnor gratefully acknowledges the help of the staff of these museums and also the advice of ONs members and friends, especially Professor Hla re, Dr P Vernon, Dr M Mitchiner, Mr N Singer, and Mr M Robinson.

Certain apects of the Burmese series still need further study, and the author will be pleased to hear from anyone who can provide details of coins not listed, and information on the location and details of mints past and present. --- 10. 11. GS ks

# REFERENCES QUOTED IN TEXT

EH Jonhnston, "Some Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan" Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 1943 pp 357-385

M Mitchiner, "Some Early Arakan and Pyu-Mon Coins" JNSI Vol XXXIV 1972 pp 47-59

A P Phayre, "Coins of Arakan, Pegu and of Burma" Marsden's International Numismata Orientalia, 1882

R C Temple, "Currency and Coinage among the Burmese" Indian Antiquary Vol LVII, 1928 w L Barrelto, "King Mindon" New Lirsht of Burma Press, Rangoon, 1935

B Smythies, "The Birds of Burma" Oliver and Boyd, 1953

H Yule, "Mission to the Court of Ava in 1855" Smith Elder, 1858

Shwe Kaing Tha, "Mandalay" "WAG: Mandalay, 1959 op

Longbeach Sale Catalogue, August 1975 Paramount International Coin Corporation

L Forrer, "Biographical Dictionary of Medallists" Spink, 1904

oK,uaH yM"  esemruB  dna  naisA  nioC "‏noitcelloC البس eliforP  fo  a  amruB  reitnorF,naM  gnuadnaB,aisenodnI ‏3691

# GENERAL REFERENCES F 5 V Donnison, "Burma" Earnest Benn, London, 1970 bD GE Hall, "A History of S E Asia" St Martin's Press, 1955

G & Harvey, "Outline of Burmese History" Longmans, 1929

Shway Yoe, (Scott J G), "The Burman, his life and notions" Norton, 1963

Dorothy Woodman, "The Making of Burma" Cresset, 1962
## ae

# CATALOGUE OF COINS

# PERIOD A \_ BODAWPAYA (1781-1819)

A1 Arakan - Amarapura 1146 BE (1784 AD) These Amarapura coins are the last of the 17/18th Century Arakan series, having been issued by King Bodawpaya of Burma when he

conquered Arakan in 1784, They were Bodawpaya's first coins and therefore form a starting point for this study.

Ata Obv & Rev: Inscription within oblique line border. 1784 AD DON ب‎ Amarapura Amarapura s0€ ko, @)?+ Hsin byu mya - - Kingdom of the Lord pease 0 Shin naing ngan of many white elephants Dia: 33mm Wt: 9.98¢m Alb Obv & Rev: Inscription as Ala within border of dots and lincs.

Dia: 35mm Wt: 9.87gm Atc Obv & Rev: Inscription as Ala without border. ean Dia: 27-2923 Wt: c.10.5¢m

| Ae | As A1 in Gold, |
|:--- |:--- |
| Obv & Rev: | Inscription as Ala within oblique line border. |
| Dia: 27mm | Wt: 10.11gm |
| Ata | A1b |

Obv & Rev: Inscription as Ala within oblique line border. Dia: 27mm Wt: 10.11gm Ata A1b

- Symbolic coin  4797 AD Silver Minted in Calcutta from pattern provided by Bodawpaya. A3a Obv: Sankh shell surmounted by a hti (umbrella) and flanked

'" by two cobras. Rev: A design of triangles and lines which may represent fire,

water and air as symbols of the cosmology of 'Buddhism, Ref 1. p.35 and Pl IV No.2 Dia: 30mm Wts'c.9.-9gm A3b Obv & Rev: as A3a with minor design differences. ' Dia: 17mm Wt: 3.45¢m Aja A3b
# AL -10-

"Two fishes" design 1143 BE (1781 AD) \_ Copper ec" From an examination of thirteen specimens of this coin there would appear to be five distinct types, as A4.1 to A4.5 below,

classified by diameter and weight, together with known die varieties. The largest, i.e. 44.1 may have been the "pice" referred to by

Temple (Ref 4. pp 14-15), but as he records that they were issued by Bodawpaya at a token value, and the "pice" is an Indian, not a Burmese unit, no attempt is made to attribute denominations to them.

A4.1 Large flan Obv: Two fishes on a plain ground. Rev: Inscription in a circle with a border of dots. 535699 م‎ 1143 Era 1781 AD

## oO 36 ده زه‎

Tabodwe la 14th day of the waning moon 8 35 ص6‎ byi gyaw in the month of Tabodwe, 26 od 14th

Die varieties: A4.1a Crude designs and script. No centre circle. A4.1b «As A4,1a but " "'ى‎ omitted from "o)" on second line of script. A4.1c Improved design and script, with centre circle. A4.1d As A4&.1c with centre hole punched. Dia: 31-32mm Wt: ce. 9.76gm

## جم

| muideM | nalf |
|:--- |:--- |
| vbO | &:veR sA no‏1,4A |
|:aiD | mm03-92 |
|:tW |  |
| ec | 5‏me4 | --- Ee ae A4.3 Small flan Obv & Rev: as on A4,1 Dia: 22mm Wt: 4,39¢gm

A4.4 \| Medium flan: Obv: as A4.1 Rev: as A4.1 but without dotted border. Dia: 28mm Wt: 6.97¢m "A4.5. Medium flan \| Obv & Rev: as A4.4 but from improved dies and punched centre hole. Dia: 27.5mm Wt: 7.53gm

# AL 4 44.5

AS "Two fishes" design \| 1143 BE Silver --- Reported by Temple, but none observed.

# PERIOD B BAGYIDAW (1819-1837) No coins known.

# PERIOD C THARAWADDY (1837-1846)

C1 Reported by Barrelto as Obv: Moon and hare, Rev: Lotus. Silver. but none observed.

# PERIOD D PAGAN (1846~1853)

D1 Reported by Barrelto as Obv: Year of Religion 2390 Rev: Shwepyizoe bird, Silver. None observed.

#. PERIOD E MINDON \_ (1853-1878)

## E1 ١ Shwepyizoe bird design

2396 Noble Era Silver. Obv: Shwepyizoe bird on a plain ground, with dotted rim. Rev: 2% 2806o% tha tha na daw Era of the Noble Religion J 2G AD 1853 Dia: 39mm $$ Wt: 16.45¢m (=1kyat) $$

E2 1 Kyat Spread wing peacock 1214 BE \* Silver. Obv: Peacock with spread wings in full display and two groups of five rosettes. Rev: 0 2 6 thagiyit Era

## mM AD 1853 3-9 Dia: 29.5mm Wt: 16,23gm
E3 Common ''Peacock" series 1214 BE Silver. E31..C¥7) 1 Kyat Dia: 31mm Wt: c. 11.5gm Obv: Inscription around peacock in full display 5 55 كمو»‎: oO 26 Tazeik taw Stamp Royal

Rev: Inscription around wreath. Value and date in centre, 1920 و6‎ pS 6075 Yadanabon nepyidaw 'Mandalay the Royal Residence 99: 30): t'tjat thon dinga Use coin as 1 Kyat

# 1853 AD

# E361 E32 23.2 (Y¥6) 5 Mu ' 2 213: 24mm Wt: 5.57عس‎ Obv & Rev: As E3.1 except value:- 21 ve Nga mu thon Use as 5 Mu

E3.3 (¥5) 1 Mat ' Dia: 19.5mm Wt: c. 2.9g¢m Obv & Rev: As E3.1 except value:- NE t'mat thon Use as 1 Mat

B5e%:.AX4)... Adon, i... Dia: 15.5mm Wt: c. 1.4gm Obv & Rev: As E3.1 except 1731116:- 9 29% t'mu thon Use as 1 Mu Ese. Aad wt ee. Dias 12mm. Wt: c. 0.75gm

'Three die varieties are known: E3.5a Obv & Rev: As E3.1 except value:- P $$ = $$ 93° t'be thon Use as 1 Pe ae,

E3.5b Accent omitted from value, reading 9 3: instead of 92):

E3-5¢c Figure J omitted from date, reading 39 ؟2‎ instead of 6

E+ Bronze pattern of silver "peacock" 5 Mu Obv & Rev: As 55.2 Dia: 24mm Wt: 4.77gm; --- eS 5 ae

ES Peacock on stippled ground 1214 BE - - Silver. Sata, -< 'e

fy Site These coins are possibly common "peacock"!

type E3 coins with the stippling applied after striking, thus obliterating the

obverse inscription. Only 1 Mat and 1 Mu versions are known to the author, but Temple records a 5 Mu,

E5.1 1 Kyat As E3.1 but stippled. Dia: 31mm Wt:11.31gm E5.2 5 Mu As E3.2 but stippled. (See Temple, Ref 4, p 44.) E5.3 1 Mat As E3.3 but stippled. Dia: 19.5mm Wt: 2.69gm E5.4 Mu As E3.4 but stippled. Dia: 15.5mm Wt: 1.32¢m

E6 Gold restrikes of silver "peacock" types E3. 1214 BE E6.1 1 Kyat As 1 Reported by Friedberg, none observed. E6.2 1 Mu As E3.4 Dia: 15.5mm Wt: 1.64¢m ' E6.3a 1 Pe As 5 Dia: 12.Omm Wt:c. 0,.65gm E6.3b 1 Pe As 5 Diaz: 12,Omm - - Wt: 0.90gm 1 Kyat Folded wing peacock 1222 BE Silver. Obv: Peacock facing L, tail folded, flanked by floral branches. Rev: & 30 9 2 thagiyit Era لله‎ (AD 1860) Dia: 32mm Wt: c. 15.75gm

## 58.1

E8.1 1 Kyat Obv: Chinthe (mythical lion), inscription and date: \[pE.ca 055 605 chinthe tazeiktaw Chinthe Stamp Royal 6ر3‎ ry) ا‎ AD 1866 Rev: Set did ree around wreath, value in centre: q ن 80 مه‎ © $b w Gov" Yadanabon Nepyidaw Mandalay the 0 5 ¢ Royal Residence D 29% 30): t'tjat thon dinga \<0 Use coin as 1 Kyat Dia: 26/5mm Wt: 11.94gm

E8.2 2 Mu Pe (23 Mu) © Obv & Rev: As E8.1 except value:

° E ke 202 30: hnit mu t'be thon dinga Use coin'as 24 Mu ا‎: Dia: 18,.5mm Wt: ce 2.75gm

E8.3 1 Pe; Obv & Rev: As 88.1 except value: 5 a 30): t'be thon dinga Use coin as 1 Pe Dia: 11.0 Wt: 0.67¢m --- ae \| eee

EQ (Y1) dPe Peacock displaying 1227 BE Copper.

Obv: Peacock facing L, in full display, and inscription around,

with date below ع قاد‎ feet. 2 6 af, oO 8s Cons Udaung dazeik taw Peacock Stamp Royal

عد‎ Ops 1865 AD Rev: Inscription and value within garland:

## 09020 3

Yadanabon Mandalay 63 دمج‎ ¢ Sond, Nepyidaw the Royal Residence 3 0 6 Gi t'"be thon dinga i Coin to be used as

© 00 2 lay bon ta bon one fourth part of one Pe Dia: 25mm Wt: ©». 6.3gm Die varieties: (a) Six rayed star above and

below'legend on reverse. (b) No stars on reverse.

E10 (Y¥1a) As type E8 in iron. Reported by Temple but none observed.

E11 (Y2) 4Pe Chinthe' 1231 BE Copper. Obv: erase facing L, inscription and date. lo€ GOD 2 Gos Chinthe tazeik taw Chinthe Stamp Royal oJ oe?) 1869 AD Rev: Inscription within wide floral border:

-ج3‎ Game 5 ب‎ A hsaung daw mye Always keep with you, Dia: 31mm Wt: ce 11.4¢m

# E11

E12 Hare design 1231 8 Lead. 212.18 (Y¥ D1) 1/16 Pe

## co Obv: ae facing L, inscription and date

oa\} 0 BO CoS Yon. tazeik taw Hare Stamp Royal

# \{ ' 1869 AD

## Rey: Value in wreath

ee. 9 36): Kye ni dinga - - Copper coin i ¢ و تب‎ 3 i lay bon ta bon of four parts one part i.e. Use coin as 2 part of copper coin E12.1b Variety with reverse blank -see Temple p. 45 and Pl. II No.36 --- ~ Ei2.ca (Y 6 1/32 Pe

Obv & Rev: As E12.1a 'except value: 'Se \*, Gil © ei amo i shit pon ta pon

(Use coin) as 1/8th part (of copper coin) Dia: 20-21mm Wt: ©. 7 سع0.‎

٠ 5212.28 Design and inscription as E12.2a but a thicker coin Dia: 20-21mm Wt: c. 13.2gm

# PERIOD F THIBAW (1878-1885)

Pi. CY. C8)... 5 Ma 1240 BE Gold. Obv: T6 (Mythical lion with deer's head) facing L.,

inscription and date: a Qo: Mm WO CON T6 dazeik taw T6 Stamp Royal هر؟ه ١ ‎ 1878 AD

Rev: Inscription around wreath, with value in centre:

٠ Cc Vo 9 65\| تح‎ Go Yadanabon nepyidaw Mandalay the Royal Residence كك‎ MN Q7: 30): nga mu thon dinga Use coin as 5 Mu Dia: 21,5mm\_ Wt: 5.85gm

F2 (¥9) 2d Pe 1240 BE Copper. Ours TS, with inscription around:.٠ 0 cz Oo? DO Coy T6 dazeik taw T6 Stamp Royal

## Rev: Inscription ardund wreath, with value in centre, and date

Qn HO Csfopoons. Yadanabon nepyidaw Mandalay the Royal Residence 2 052 38): t'mu thon dinga Use coin as one eighth

3 وا‎: shit pon ta bon part of one Mu )0 © يفم مب بعاد‎ S 1878 AD Two die varieties of the Reverse are known: Dia: 25.5mm F2a With rosette upright at top of wreath ia - -:  5.7gm F2b With rosette oblique at top of wreath 2°76

F3 (Y 9a) Brass copy of 2 Pe 2: Designs and inscriptions are similar to Fe but cruder. Dia: c. 26mm Thickeness vary considerably and the weights of specimens examined varied from 2.65gm to 6.23gm.

# PERIOD G BRITISH RULE (1885-1948)

The coins of British India were in use throught this period,

except during the Japanese occupation 1942-1945,
# a

# PERIOD H REPUBLIC OF BURMA (1948-present)

Coins of types H1 to H3 were struck by thé Royal Mint in the UK, and as the details supplied by them included mintage figures,

these are quoted here for completeness. Numbers quoted are in millions to the nearest 10,000 و‎ e.g. 1.64M represents 1,642,000.

H1 Chinthe design The denominations and shapes of these the first coins of the Republic, correspond to the Indian coins which they replaced. They all have 05: a chinthe on a plain ground.

Rev: value in figures and words, with the AD date below.

# H1.5

144 42°79 8 Pe Round, milled edge. Nickel, a 5-0 5.  Ges Dia: 24.1mm O shit pe Eight Pe Wt: 5,.83gm

Dates: 9366 1949, 290 1950 Mintage: 327M oy BgGer

H1.2 (Y 16) 4 Pe Round, milled edge. Nickel. > Rev: \<a ae Pe + Pe Dia: 19.1mm ON ني‎ t'mat One Mat Wt: 2.92gm

## Dates: غ320‎ 1949, 9690 1950

H1.3 (Y 15) 2 Pe Square, plain edge. Cupro nickel. dais 55 لج‎ 2 Pe 2 Pe Across flats:; J 22.4mm FY) Oo. hnit pe Two Pe Across ويد +ع‎ aig Dates: 2. 09 36001950 225 31  eta.Mintage: 7.10M 8.52M 748M Wt: 5.83gm H1.4 (¥ 14) 1 Pe Twelve scallops, plain edge. Cupro nickel.

Rev: 5  ٠ 207 nes Across crests OD YO t'be One Pe of scallops:

21,O0mm Dates: OCG 1949 96901950 96991951 Mintage: -8,00M 6.50M Wt: 3.89gm ---. i 17 7

H1.5 (Y¥ 13) 2 Pya Square, plain edge. Cupro nickel.:, Across flats: Rev:: 0 2 Pya 2 Pya ~< 174mm

## $5 Gr

hnit pya Two Pya Across corners: Date: 266 م‎ 19.8mm Mintage: 7.00M Wt: 2.92gm

H2.: 8 Pe "1952 Trial/Error Proof,: Cupro nickel. (See Seaby's Bulletin Sept 1976, p 370) SES Obv: Chinthe, inscription and date (BE):

## كد ب\]‎ coor€ Sar 566 6005 مخ‎ 1 1 t Pyi daung zu myama naing ngan daw thagayit gu hnit Royal Union of Burma States Era Year (1952 AD) Rev: as H1.1 but with date روعد‎ (1952AD)

H3 Decimal issue $$ 1952 = 1966 $$ Chinthe design.

855.1 135.2 5.ظظ12. م83‎ H3.6 H3.1 (¥ 23) 1°Kyat Round, security edge. Cupro nickel. Obv: Chinthe, inscription and date (BE), as H2. Rev: yoine and date (AD): Dia: 30.5mm

## 1 ا‎ 1 Kyat Wt: 11,66gm OD \| S t'tjat One Kyat,

## re) oe

Dates: ~ 1952, 1953, 1956, 1965. Mintage: 250M 7.501 3.50M 1.00M --- $$ = 18 هف‎ $$

## 13.2 (Y 22)

50 Pya Round, security edge. Cupro nickel, Obv & Rev: As H3.1 except value: Dia: 26. م0‎ >: bya Pya Wt: 7.78gm

Dates: 1952, 1954, 1956, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1965, 1966. Mintage: 4.14M 12.0M 8.0M 2.0M 0,601 4.8011 2,80mM 3,40M

H3e3 (¥ 21) 25 Pya Six scallops, plain edge. Cupro nickel, Obv: & Rev: As H3.1 except value:

Across crests +9 of scallops: 24.0Omm >: bya Pya Wt: 6,80gm

Dates: 1952, 1954, 1956, 1959, 1961, 1963, 1965.

H3e4 (¥ 20) 10 Pya Square, plain edge. Cupro nickel, Obv: Chinthe on a plain ground. Rev: As H3.1 except value:

## ssorcA:stalf ‏mm8.91 01 مد

ssorcA:srenroc ‏mm4.32 keS ayb ayP:tW ‏m¢45.4

Dates: 1952, 1952, 1953, 1956, 1962, 1963, 1965. Mintage: 20.0M 37.25M 22,7511 35.0M 6,00M 21.5M

H3.5 (¥ 19) 5 Pya Twelve scallops, plain edge. Cupro nickel. Obv & Rev: As H3.4 except value: Across crests ( of scallops: 10.5mm: Wt: 3.24¢m [> bya Pya Dates: 1952, 1953, 1955, 1956, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1965, 1966. Mintage: 20.0M 59.7M 40.2M 20.0M 12.0M 10.0M 40.0M 43.6M 20.0M

H3.6 (¥ 18) 1 Pya Round, plain edge. Bronze. Obv & Rev: As H3.4 except value:

## Dia: 18. 00 Wts.. Yee

' Dates: 1952, 1953, 1955, 1956. Mintage: 0.5M 14.011 30.0M 15.0M

Note: Limited issues (100 sets) of proof coins of types H1 and H3

were made in the years 1950, 1953, and 1961, bearing dates 1949, 1952, and 1956 respectively. --- $$ = 49 $$ $$ = $$

H4 General Aung San Issue 1966 Aluminium, All coins in this series have shapes as for -the first decimal

issue, Types H3, ae All have the same Obverse:

# Head of General Aung San, inscription and date (BE)

Dd cont a د وجا‎ RE ع‎ cond تند تعب‎ 0 29M op & 2940 256

Pyi daung zu myama naing ngan daw pyi thu ban thagayit 1314 gu hnit '\* Royal Union of Burma States Peoples Bank Era Year All have the same style of Reverse: Value and date (AD).

H4+.1 (¥ 28) 50 Pya, Round. Value on Rev: Jo Dia: 25.Omm Wt: 2.O0gm kn: ' هيد"‎

H4.2 )7 27). 25 Pya, Six scallops. Value on Rev: Across crests of scallops: 23. 0 Pya

H4.3 (Y¥Y 26) 10 Pya, Square. Value on Rev: o> Across flats: 19, 050 Wt: 1.O0gm.:

١ Across corners: 22.5mm ye:. Frye جا باقر‎ (¥ 25) 5 Pya, Twelve scallops. Value on Rev: Across crests of scallops: 18.4mm,

##,: Wt: 0,8igm (7? Pya H4.5 (Y 24) 1 Pya, Round. Value on Rev: Dia: 17. 0 Wt: 0.57gm (>

H5 FAO Issue 1 Kyat Cupro nickel. Obv: Sheaf of rice, inscription and date: \[p25 con afp an 5 © ney

Pyi daung zu myama naing ngan ban Union of Burma States Bank Rev: Value: e 7: 1 tjat 1 Kyat § OD اعد‎ t'tjat One Kyat

Dia: 26.0Omm Wt: 7.Ogm