# NOVEMBER 1976. ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCISTY

# INFORIATION SHEET NO.15

# EARLY ARAB COINS OF TUNISIA

## Part II - The Aghlabids, 184-296 AH (800-909 AD) By M.L. Tarizzo Historieal Background

That part of Africa which more or less corresponds to today's Tunisia had been occupied by the Arabs in the second part of the 7th century AD and the

region - called "Ifriqiyah" by the Arabs - had been ruled by Governors appointed first by the 'Umayyad and then by the Abbasid Caliphs (see the first article of this series).

Difficulties in communication had favoured the development of a certain degree of autonomy and the concentration of power in the hands of a small elite of locally established Arabs. The governors appointed by the Abbasid Caliphs after 151 AH (767 AD) were in fact all members of the same Arab family. In spite of this trend towards local rule, wrest increased and military revolts occurred in the region,

In 184 AH (800 AD), Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn Aghlab whose father had been killed by soldiers under his command some 35 years earlier as Amir of Ifriqiyah, in recognition of his role in the negotiations which had put a temporary end to the revolts, At the same time the Caliph granted Ibrahim ibn Aghlab the right to transmit the government to his descendents thus establishing dynastic rule over the Ifriqiyah. It was stipulated that the province should remain nominally subject to the Caliphs of Baghdad and thet the Caliph, instead of sending an annual contribution of 100,000 dinars, would receive an annual tribute, fixed at 40,000 dinars, This condition was not always fulfilled and the local Amir had often to ask for help from the Caliph.

Ibrahim established his carital in Kairouan am founded a new town about 3 km to the south, which he called al-Abbassiyah, in honour of the Caliph, a name which had already been used to indicate Kairouen, Under Ibrahim and his successors - who took their dynastic name from al~Aghlab, the father of Ibra\*im the Ifriqiyah became practically independent and the period of Aghlabid rule was one of religious fervour accampanied by the development of agriculture, trade and public works, Notwithstanding continuing political and economic problems.

One of the main sources of trouble was the relationshiv between the ruling Arab class and the local Berber population, Heavy taxes were imposed and the local administrators often took advantage of a complex bureaucracy to pursue their own personal interest. Fven more serious was the unrest among the soldiers who were supposed to maintain internal security and guard the borders, Instead they frequently rebelled against the central government, helped at times by ex-soldiers who had settled in the region, This situation eventually led theAmirs to create a "Praetorian suard"" consisting mainly of loyal Negros and charged to protect the Amir and to rerress revolts. This centralising of military power contribute to a gradual weakening of the defences along the borders and thus indirectly to the eventual downfall of the Aghlabid dynasty.

Under the Amir "iyadat Allah I (201-223 AH, 816-837 AD) several military chiefs in the northcrn part of the region asserted their independence, In part as a diversion, Ziyedat Allah launched in 212 4H (827 AD) a campaign for the

conquest of Sicily. Byzantine control over the island was detericratin= and Sicily was the only neighbouring region still in the hand of the Christians, --- د‎

The first Arab lending in Sicily took place in response to 2 request for help

received from Buphemius, a Sicilian naval comzander of greek origin «ho had proclaimed his independence from the Byzantine emperor, Suphemius was murdered by Sicilians shortly there-fter, but the Arabs gradually extended their occupation notwithstanding some local resistance and the intervention of Venice and other Italian maritime republics. By the end of the 9th century AD practically the whole of Sicily was occuvied and it was to remain undez Arab domination until, the Norman conouest of 1040 AD.

The Sicilien campaign was a success for the Arabs, but it contributed to the downfall of the Aghlabids by weakenins their strength in Ifrigqiyah, The Shite Arabs who had settled to the west of the region controlled by the Sunni Aghlabids intensified their harassment at the borders, with the help of Berber

tribes and of small Arab 'singdoms, including the descemients of ibn Rustam, a former ruler of Ifriqiyah who had escaped to the west when the Abbasids had occupied the region, Under the lest of the Aghlabid rulers, Ziyadat Allah III, a cruel and hated ruler, the Shiite Arabs and their Berber allies, the Kotam, defeated what was left in Ifriqiysh of the Aghlabid troops and in March 909 AD (296 AH) occupied Kairouan, thus putting an end to the \\ghlabid veriod and opening: the way for the establishment of the Fatimid dynasty. Description of the Coins

The coins minted by the Aghlabids are basically similar to those of the early Abbasid Caliphs and remained uniform in type throughout the period of Aghlabid rule. They are in general well made and may be considered among the best examples of Arab coins, The basic desig is comprised of Kufiec script set in 3 to 5 horizontal lines on both the obverse and the reverse, surrounded by single circular marginal 16-6208 ه‎ Gold Coins

The majority of the gold coins which are known for this period are dinars varying from 17 to 20mm in dianeter and from 3.63 to 4.25 grams in weirit. A few 1/4 dinars have been described, all issved by Ibrehim II and weighing approximately 1.0 grams,

## The normal obverse consists of a centrxl horizontal lezend in 3 lines

iving the first part of the kalimah 4f و حرك/لا شر يكف‎ - / هلاذل الك‎ ee is no god put/God He is alone / there is no associate to Him) while a

circular marginal legend bears the "prophetic mission" (Koran IX, 33). On some coins a fourth line is added below the Kalimah, with a proper name, in all probability, that of the officer in charge of the mint or the treasury. The following names have been recorded:-

Ibrahim I Musa Muhammad IT Hasan (on copper coins only) 7iyadat + 1 Masrur Ibrahim II Shakar

Muhammad I Khalaf Balach Jabran Ziyadat Allah IIT Hattab Ahmad illecible Abu 'ader

The reverse is similar and consists of 5 central horizontal lines of which line 2, 3 and 4 contain the second vart of the kalimah Wi هه رسو ل‎ ado (Muhammad is the Apostle of God) and line 5, the name of the Amir,
# a

## With the exception of the coins of IbrahimI, line i has the word غلب‎

(\*ghalaba", He has conquered), a reference to the victory of God over the infidels and therefore to the successes. of the Arabs but at the same time

the symbol of the dynasty. It is simificant that this word does not appear on the gold coins which have been attributed to Ibrahim as especially minted for the payment of the annual tribute to the 681151٠

The early coins of Ibrahim I have at the bottom, the word "ghalaba" or the formula "for the Caliph". On coins dated 193 to 196 AH, "for the Caliph" is moved to the top line with the word al-Imam or al-Amin appearing at the bottom.

The circular reverse legend has the "bismillaWK with the dete but not the place of minting which in the case of gold coins was presumably always Kairouan. Silver Coins

Silver dirhams of this period sre less numerous than gold coins and are known from four only of the eleven Aghlabid Amirs, The basic design is similsr to that of the dinars, but notwithstanding their limited number, these coins show more varicty,especially in the reverse legends, In common with contemporarv Abbasid dirhems, the mint/date formula is on the obverse for coins of Ibrahim I,

of Abd Allah I and of Ziyadat AllahI, whereas those of Ibrahim II follow the arrangement of the dinars, The normal mint was Ifriqiyah but other mints are shown on coins of Ziyadat Allah I and the name al-Abbasiyah is known for a half dirhem of Ibrahim I, and all coins of Ibrvhim II,

Three different issues of Ziyadat Allah I dated 210 exist, two having the formula "for the Caliph' instead of the nome of the Amir. One comes from. رزاجم‎ (Majaz, today Mejez-el-Bab) with the name على‎ ('ali) on the obverse, and one from Ifriqiyah with the name © علو‎ 0 Thesecoins © some supporting evidence for the attribution of the "lil-Khalifat' dinars to the Agnlabids. It should be noted that dinars of this period have the name Masrur.

On the third of the dirhams of 210 AH, the word jc (just) replaces "shalaba" on the reverse withthe nane of liansur ibn Nasir (al Tambadhi), a military chief who occupied Kairouan for a short time and who declared his independence, The word Mansur i.e. "the Victor" is repeated under the name.

Another silver coin issued during the reign of Ziyadat Allah I has هيلقس‎ Siqaliyah, i.e. Sicily) as mint and bears the name 5د‎ و١‎ ey ن‎ Sliman ibn Daud), The legends and their arrangement are those of the 'Umsyvad coins which were then minted in Spain. The name is probably that of a 'Umavyad general put at the disposal of Ziyadat Allah for the Sicilian campaign and it is likely that the coin had been pinbed in Spain, to be used for paying the soldiers in Sicily,"

No dirhams of later Aghlabid Amirs are known until 275 AH when Ibvahim II reformed the coinage after his victory of 267 AH (880 AD) over an Keyptian orny had put him in possession of the treasure of the Tulunids, The silver coins of low weight and poor alloy then in circulation in Ifriqiyah - most of them in fragments and used in transactions according to their weight - were 7731 and replaced by new coins with the legends copying those of the dinars of this period, The value of these new dirhams was fixed at 10 for 1 dinar, althouch their recorded weights range between 1.0 and 1.65 gramres, instead of the 2.20 to 2.97 of the early dirhems. --- Copper Coins

The issues of two Amirs only are renresented by the relatively few copper coins of this period which have been described and these can seldom be attributed with confidence. On most of those likely to belong to this series the marginal legends, which include the date, are worn or missing, and the central legends are often simplified, Summary of Aghlabid coins

Gold Coins - - when not otherwise specified the coins correspond to the following general description:- Obverse Circular legend (Koran IX, 33):

## Central legend in 3 horizontal lines

## لا eniL 1 ‏uaiN الله 5 حذه 2 ‏eniL

## لا شر م له 3 ‏eniL There is no God but God He is alone there is no associate to Him Reverse Circular legend (ate) Central lerend in 5 horizontal lines:

| Lin | ale |
|:--- |:--- |
| Line | 2 محمد‎ |
| Line 3 رب | سوا ل‎ |

## Line 2 محمد‎

## Line 3 رب سوا ل‎ Line 4 الله‎ Line 5 ("\*chalaba") Jivhammad is the Anostle of God (name of the Amir) --- Gold Coins Nc Mint named

Amir Above Below Dates Diameters Weights "otes Rev. Rev, Known mm grams

Ibrahim ibn - - ghalaba  189,192 4.20 al-Aghlab

184~196/800-81 1 1j1-Khalifat 189, 190 17 -18,5 3.95-4.24 attributed to Ibrahim by Lik-Khalifet al-Amin 193,194,195 5 80-0 Farrugia de Candia

## al-Imam 17-5 4.104 0

'Abd Allah ibn ghalaba 'Abd Allah 197,199, 18.5-19 4, 20-4, 4 Ibrahim 200, 201 196-201/811-816

3.60 al-Ifriqiyah below obverse Ziyadat Allah ibn ghaleba Ziyadat $$ 202=206,210 $$ 4,05-4 5 (possibly Aghlabid) Ibrahin Alleh

201 -223/816~837, 207-216 17-65 35.,00-4 25 Masrur below obverse $$ 219=222 $$

Al-Aghlab.in ghalaba alwAghlab 2253-6 5, +4سق8‎ Ibrahim 223-226/837-840

Muhammad I ibn " Muhammad 226-229 18.5-19 4,10-4.19 Khalaf below obverse \_al~Aghlab © 231, 232, 234 17-9 4.14-4,21 226-242/840-856 " Jabrap below obverse
# 2 ee aS Gold Coins (Continued)

Amir Above Below Dates Diameters 'eights Notes Rev. Rev. lnown mm grans

Ahmad ibn Muhammad @halaba Ahmad 242,243,245, 17-19 3. 90-4 20 246, 2455-9

24 2-249/ 856-865 " 245, 247° 4, 20-4 5 below obverse Ziyadat Allah II ibn i.uhammad Xo coins Ikmown

## 249-250/ 8653-4

Huhanmad II ibn Ahmad ghalaba Muhammad 251-4 18-19 4,08-4,21

## 250-261/864 - 54 257-9 4.144,0 Hasan below obverse

Ibrahim II ibn Ahmad Ibrahim 175-19 4.15-4 0 Shakar below obverse 261-283/874-902. " " 265-7 4.19-4,22 Balagh below obvurse? $$ 247=8, 274 $$ 1.0-1 05 % dimer. 9 "

262-35, 267270, 272 18-20 5635-4 274-281, 283-4, 287-9 1.04 + dinar --- Gold Coins (Continued)

Amir Above Below Dates Diameters Weights Notes Rev. Rev. Known mm grams

'Abd Allah II ibn Ibrahim ghalaba 'Abd Allah 4,O0f-4,17 2859-02

Ziyadat Allah 111155 Abd Ziyadat Allah 291-3 18-9 4.0'7-4,0 Hatt.ab below obverse Allah 290, 293 18-9 4.11-4,18

290-296/902-908 " n 295-6 19-20 5, 88-4 8 Abu Madar below obverse --- Silver Coins Obverse Reverse Ibrahim ibn 81-5 Circular legend: Central legend: Circular legend: Central legend:

When not otherwise described, the legends are:-

## "bismilleh", place - usually يفيه‎ po) Ifrigiyah and date of minting. first part of the "kalimah" in 3 lines Koran, IX, 33 in 5 lines, including the second part of the "Kalinah" Reverse Circul Line 1 Line 2 Line 3 Line 4 Line

# 184-196 AH (800-811 AD)

ar legend: (by the authority of al-Mamun Abd Allah

## Commander of the believers)

# 3 زسر‎ ge الله‎ yo الله‎

# ا بر هيم‎

| shalaba" | AH 184,186, |
|:--- |:--- |
| 187, 189, 190, | 191,194. |
| Muhammad is the Apostle | 1.90-2.90 ems, | 187, 189, 190, 191,194. Muhammad is the Apostle 1.90-2.90 ems, of God God bless him and grant him veace $$ 14,5=24mm $$ Ibrahim

Similar but + dirhem of al-Abbassiyah AH124, 1.40 grams, 1°mm,Mint/date

formula preceded by "by the authority of the Commander of the believers". Reverse Reverse Central legend: Line 1 Line 2

## Line 3 Line 4تدوهياربمألا‎ As zo! ke Line 5

# غلب

# محم.دة رسو ( الله pols الله عليه و‎ do

| pte | p' |
|:--- |:--- |
| "shalaba" | AH1&9 |
| Muhammad is the Apostle of God | 2,85-3.1ems | "shalaba" AH1&9 Muhammad is the Apostle of God 2,85-3.1ems God bless him and grant him peace by the authority of the Amir al-Mamun Central Legeni: Line 1 Line 2 Line 3 Line 4 Line 5 Ibrahim 24-26 mm good

| Yuhammad is the Apostle | AH 195 |
|:--- |:--- |
| of God the Prophet | 2.72 gms, |
| mercy | 23mm | of God the Prophet 2.72 gms, mercy 23mm for the Caliph
'Abd Allah ibn Ibrehim 196-201 AH (811-814 AD)

Obverse Central Legend: kalimah on line 1, 2 and 4 Line 3 جح‎ good Reverse Central legend Line 1 a + "ehalaba"

Line - gw محمد ر‎ Muhammad is the Apostle line 3 با الا مبر‎ pike alll of God by the authority AH 198 of the Amir

Line 4 عبك الله بن ابر هيم‎ 'Abd Allah ibn Vbrahim 24 mm Line 5 عبد ا لله‎ "Abd Allah

Ziyadat Allah ibn Ibrahim 201-223 AH (814-837 AD)

Obverse Central legend: kalimah on line 1, 2 and 4 Line 3 و ر‎ jo Masrur Reverse Central legend Line 1, 2 and 3 as preceding coin of 198 AH

## Line 4 ةدايز

اللهبن أبرهيم‎ Ziyadat Allah ibn Ibrahim 48208, Line 5 al) OSL Ziyadat Allah 2.82-2,96 gms, 26mm

Coins minted during the reign of Ziyadat Allah but bearing different nomes

Obverse Central legend: kalimah on line 1, 2 and 4 Line 3 2. S&.  very good Reverse Central legend

| Line 1 | 2» Se | just | AH 210 |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Line 2 | ~lg-\>0 | Muhammad | 2.70 gms. |
| Line 3 رسييول | الله‎ | is the Apostle of God | 26mm | Line 2 ~lg->0 Muhammad 2.70 gms.

Line 3 رسييول الله‎ is the Apostle of God 26mm

Line 4 JY ر ين‎ yo $=Mansur ibn Nasir Line 5 037 وصنتم‎ Mansur

Obverse Central legend: kalimah on line 1, 2 and 4

## Line 3 ws علو‎ "Alun Reverse Central Legend Line 1 © co very good AH 210

Line 2 J pw jSo\>o Muhammad is the Apostle 2.95 gms. Line 3 ww aul of God the Prophet 26 nm

## Line 4 حمة‎ J mercy Line 5 هميلتخلل‎ for the Caliph --- Obpverse Reverse Obverse Reverse Ibrahim IT -):

## Circular legeni J lye (iajaz) instead of arias \| Ifriqiyah Central legend as above but: Line 3 dc "Ali AH 210

| Circular legend missing |?,20 oms, |
|:--- |:--- |
| Central legend as preceding coin with 'Alun on obverse | 25mm |
| Circular legend: | dubia. (Siqaliyah) insteai of Ifriqivah |

Central legend as preceding coin with 'Alun on obverse 25mm

Circular legend: dubia. (Siqaliyah) insteai of Ifriqivah ee

Central legend Line 1 لا اله الا‎ There is no god but Line 2 Un سش٠شفات‎ Slinan ibn Line 3 %6 2a الله هك‎ God He is alone

Line 4 aaa أو‎ -\_ Daud Line 5 قاب له‎ pe N there is no associate to Him Central legend (Koran CXII):

Linc 49! Sal الله‎ God is alone God AH 216 Line 2 9 al, لم‎ Sorat! is eternal He berets rot and Line 3 A لم‎ SYVy eis not begotten nor is there 2.03 cms,

Line 4 So وعك \|١ ‎ 4J like unto Him anyone 26 mn ibn Ahmad 261-289 AH (874~902 AD) Obverse Reverse

Lerends same as those of the sold coins of this veriod

Circular legend: Aiswlizs i = (al-Abbassiyah) instead of '  ١ Ifriqiyah

Central legend Line 1 wie "ehalaba AH 275, 279-.

| Line 2 ومححم‎ | Muhanrad | 1.0-1."59ms, |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Line 3 سو ل‎ 0 | is the Apostle | 1 6-220 |
| Line 4 للد‎ |  | of God | Line 3 سو ل‎ 0 is the Apostle 1 6-220 Line 4 للد‎ \| of God Line 5 pte ابر‎ Ibrahim
Copper Coins - When not otherwise described, the coins conform to the stendard type described for the silver coins. Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab 184-196 AH (800-811 AD) Reverse Obverse Reverse as Reverse As the first issue of silver ccins Central legend in 4 lines

Line 1, 2 and 3: second part of the kalimah Line 4 علب‎ "ghalaba" Central legend in 4 lines Line 1, 2 and 4: first part of the kalimah Line 3, همهو سبع‎ Musa preceding type.Central legend in 5 lines

## Line 1 قلي‎ \| "chalaba" Line 2 hn Line 3, 4 and 5: second part of the kalimah

Ziyadat Allah ibn Ibrahim 201-223 AH (816-837 AD) Obverse Reverse Circular legerd missing, obverse and reverse Central legend in 4 lines Line 1, 2 and 4: first part of the kalimah Line 4 ww مو‎ Musa

## Central legend in 5 lines Line 1 غلبف‎ " chalaba"

## Line 2, 3 and 4: second part of the kalimah Line 5 ل ةكايب الله‎ Ziyadet Allah

# AH 489 $$ 1.55=2.20¢ems,. $$ 18-1 9mm.

# ٠ AH 189

## 1.55-2.30ems. 1 سق‎ 2215 gms. 19mm AH 18x 2.17 gms 20mm