# ORTENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY JANUARY

# INFORMATION SHEET No. 24

# THES GOLD AND SILVER COINAGE OF THE SIKHS

# PART Ii THS MINTS OF LAHORE AND MULTAN

# BY

# S.GORON and K.WIGGINS

# HISTORY OF LAHORE

According to local Hindu tradition the origin of Lahore is traced to Rama, King of Ayodhya, the hero of the Ramayana, whose two sons Loh and Kash are said to have founded

the neighbouring cities of Lahore and Kasur, both of which were dependencies of the great Lalitaditya, King of Kashmir in the 8th century A.D.

Lahore was formerly called Lohawar and is possibly the Labokla of Ptolemy, Between the lst and 8th centuries A.D. it was occupied by an ancient Rajput tribe. It rose to be a place of some importance and eventually the capital of a powerful principality to which it gave its name. For some unknown reason it declined in importance and the seat of government was moved to Sialkot and vicinity, where it remained wntil the Muslim invasions,

According to Muhammadan tradition, the city and fortress of Lahore were founded by. Malik Aziz, the friend and counsellor of Mahmud of Ghazni. It is probable that the Muslims, on invading the Punjab, founded a city upon the ruins that were already there. Thereafter it remained within the realm of the Sultans of Delhi but declined in importance.

About the end of the 13th century, Amir Khusru alludes to Lahore and Kasur simply as

inhabited spots in a desolate waste. Ibn Batuta, in the mid-l4th century whilst journeying from Multan to Delhi, did not even consider Lahore worth a visit. Timur, on invading India in A.D.1398, left it to a subordinate to plunder,

During the time of the first Mughal, Babur (A.D. 1525-1530), Lahore must have become a

place of some importance for a mint that was established there was prolific in the production of silver dirhems. The minting of coin at Lahore was carried on by his son Humayun, In spite of this activity the place does not appear to have attained any size for Amin Ahmad Razi author of the Haft Aqlim (Cc. A.D. 1624) remarks that at the time of

the rise of Akbar, Lahore was nothing more than a number of detached hamlets, The minting of coin at Lahore was carried on by Akbar from A.H. 963 and thereafter by successive Mughal emperors until Alamgir II.

' It was the practice of Jahangir to move the Mughal court to Lahore from time to time but

by 1658 (following the founding of Shahjahanabad), the city had declined in wealth and

population. It did, however, remain the capital of the subah or province comprising a

large part of the Punjab and Kashmir, and the seat of the Viceroy.

During his invasion of India, Nadir Shah, the Persian, occupied Lahore in December, 1738 and, after evacuating it the following year, allowed it to revert to the Mughals.

The founder of the Durrani Empire, Ahmad Shah, invaded India soon after his accession and captured Lahore on the 22nd January, 1748. There was nothing permanent in his acquisition and at the end of the cold weather he retired to Qandahar leaving Lahore to

be re-occupied by the Mughals, The Afghans struck east across the Indus again in 1748 but soon retired. Four years later Ahmad Shah Durrani again invaded the Punjab, defeating the Mughal Vazir, Mir Mannu, at Lahore in April, 1752. This time the Durrani formally annexed the provinces of Lahore and Multan to his empire. His control over the region was however extremely loose and in fact Lahore remained under the nominal rule of the Mughals.;
In the winter of 1755-56 Ahmad Shah launched his fourth invasion of India. This time he advanced to Delhi, which he plundered. The Afghan monarch and his son Taimur both married daughters of the imperial house and Prince Taimur was appointed Nizam or governor of Lahore, Multan, Dera and Sind.

Taimur's governorship was interrupted by the advent of the Marathas, who with

imperial backing entered the Punjab with the aim of regaining the territory the Mughals had lost. In 1758 they drove Taimur out of Lahore and across the frontier.

This serious reverse for the Durranis brought Ahmad Shah back to India again and in

1759 he advanced across the Indus with a formidable army. He retook Lahore and advanced again to Delhi, where he expelled the Marathas and sacked the city. He remained in India during 1760 and on the 7th January 1761 met and destroyed the Marathas at Panipat. Having effectively broken the Maratha power, Ahmad Shah returned to Kabul. During this period the Sikhs under Jass Singh Ahluwalia were able to briefly occupy Lahore,:

The Durrani was less successful against the Sikhs, mainly because of their well tried hit and run tactics. Ahmad Shah punished them severely on a few occasions but they always regrouped in increasing numbers and strength. After Panipat, Ahmad Shah's power in India declined and his son, Taimur, was incompetent to control affairs in

the Punjab. The Durrani's grip on the Punjab weakened in the face of the rising power of the Skihs who in 1765 were able to take Lahore, ejecting Kabula Mal, the Durrani governor, with little difficulty.

Ahmad Shah invaded India for the last time in 1766-67 but advanced no further than the Jhelum river before retiring.

The Sikh Bhangi misl held Lahore without interruption wntil the Durrani Shah Zaman, who had succeeded to the throne of Kabul in 1793, invaded the Punjab in 1795-96 and appeared before Lahore in 1797. He endeavoured to conciliate the Sikhs, several of whose chiefs joined him but an internal dispute in Afghanistan forced him to return there. Zaman renewed his invasion in 1798 and entered Lahore without opposition, Before he could consolidate his position there he was again recalled to Afghanistan to deal with a Persian invasion of Khorasan. The Durrani Shah evidently arranged the cession of Lahore to the Sikhs by an arrangement made with Ranjit Singh, who dispossessed the Bhangi chiefs and made himself undisputed master

of Lahore. From this date onward Lahore was the political capitalof the Sikh realm until its occupation and anneration by the British in 1849,

The history of Lahore is reflected in the coins struck there throughout the 18th

century by the various powers that held occupation. The following list gives the names of the rulers and the known dates of their coins. A.D. A.H. Ruler

1719 to 1739 1132 to 11527 Muhammad Shah, Mughal Emperor Nadir Shah, Afsharid 1740 to 1748 1153 to 1161 Muhammad Shah, Mughal Emperor 1748 to 1752 1161' to 1165 Abmad Shah, Mughal Emperor Ahmad Shah Durrani 1754 to 1755 1168 to 1169 Alamir II, Mughal Emperor 1756 & 1757 Ahmad Shah Durrani 1756 & 1757 1170 & 1171 Taimur Shah Durrani as Nizam 1757 & 1758 1171 & 1172" Alamgir II, Mughal Emperor 1759 & 1760 1173V faimur Shah Durrani as Nizam 1759 to 1766 1173 to 1180 Ahmad Shah Durrani 1765 to 1796 Sikhs Zaman Shah Durrani 1797 & 1798 Sikhs Zaman Shah Durrani 1799 to 1845 Sikhs.
# SIKH COINS OF THE LAHORE MINT

fype I Ar rupee. Weight: 11.2 grams. Diameter: 20 = 21 mm

Ar + rupee. Weight: 5.5 grams Diameter: 19 هم‎

# Geer a yng

# jl cand \| بيد رئك‎

Transliteration Ob. Deg tegh wa fath wa nasrat bedarang yafat and translation az Nanak Guru Gobind Singh $$ = $$ Abundance, the sword, victory and help without delay Guru Govind Singh obtained from Nanak,

Rev. Zarb Dar al Sultanat Lahore, Sambat.... jalus maimanat manus $$ = $$ Struck at the Seat of the Sultanate in Samvat.... the year of prosperous accession.

V Known Dates. Rupees: S.1822, - 1823  93.1824. S.1825 8.1826 7 S.1828 5S. 1829), $$ $.16350 - S.1831. °S.1832 $$ 38.1833 S.1834 - 1835"  S.1836 S.1840 Half rupees: 5.1828 S.1832

On occupying Lahore in AD 1765 the Sikhs lost no time in striking their own money for

their first rupee from this mint is dated 5٠.1822. The Durranis struck coin in Lahore up to AH 1180 which commenced in June 1766, The reason for this inconsistency cannot be readily explained. The first Sikh issue of Lahore appears to be confined to the Silver rupees and half; the latter being very rare. Gold coins of this type are unknown,

The Sikh rupee was of good silver and followed the weight standard of Mughal and Durrani coinage. Having no precedent in the matter of minting coins the Sikhs of Lahore adopted an original type. Not having any paramount chief whose name could grace their coinage, they placed on them what was probably a poetical couplet taken from one of the Sikh holy books. The reverse merely gives that place and date of minting and it is remarkable that they should have retained the epithet for Lahore (Dar al Sultanat). which was first used on Mughal coins of the same city during the time of Akbar,

The coins of this first issue are scarce. The dates run from S.1822 to S.1840, although coins dated 8.1837, S.1838 and S.1839 have not been observed or noted from any literary source,

There are few marks of any significance on these coins. On the obverse may be observed 3 small symbol like an inverted arrow head e On the reverse, occurring on either side of the date, may be a mark which is probably meant for a flower YW WY رل‎.
# Weight

10.7 - 11.3 grams. Diameter: 21 - 24 mm 08. إن‎  ce I سب‎ wd HUN Ge pes at. Ls)

Transliteration Ob. #Sikka zad bar seem wazir az fath Gobind and translation Singh faizal sachha shahan sahib tegh az Nanak wahib ast $$ = $$ Coin struck in gold and silver through the victory of Govind Singh obtained by the grace of the true king of kings from the sword of Nanak. Rev. As Type I.

Known dates, Rupees: 5.1841. 5.1842. S.1843. S.1844. S.1845. S.1846 3.1849. S.1850. S.1852. S.1853 5.1854. 5.

The second type of rupee struck at Lahore emerged in 3.1841 (AD 1784). The obverse legend is entirely different but that on the reverse remains the same,

This type was continued until S.1855 (AD 1798), and the temporary occupation of Lahore by the Durrani Shah Zaman early in AD.1797 and again in November, AD.1798 does not appear to have interrupted the minting of the Sikh coins. Shah Zaman - - in Lahore in AE 1211 (AD 1797, S.1854) and again in AH 1213 (AD 1798,

No other denominations than the rupee have been noted and in the series of dates above it will be noted that coins of 8.1847, 5.1848 and S.1851 have escaped discovery.

The marks that are found on this type are similar to the preceding issue. A rupee of S.1849 is distinctive by a gpray to the left of the date \| the remainder have the flower symbol WY

Ar rupee. Weight: 11 - 11.15 grams. Diameter: 21 - 24 mm Ar + rupee. Weight: 5.6 grams. Diameter: 20 mm Ob. As Type II Rev. As Type II

## Rupees: s.18s6" 5.1857. 3.1858. S.1859. S.1860. S.1861

3.1862 S.1863 S.1864 8.1865 53.1866 7 3.1868 83.1864 5.1870 53.1871" 85.1872 35.1874 5 5.1877 S.1878 9 S.1880 ¥ S.1881 5.1882 S.1883 4 + Rupees: S.1864

This type commences in AD 1799, the year that Ranjit Singh took possession of Lahore.

Both obverse and reverse legends are as Type II but there is the addition of a pipal leaf on the reverse to the left of the date. As this symbol appears at an important date in Sikh history it would seem probable that the leaf was an emblem adopted by Ranjit Singh but no record of this fact has been found.
"There is a continuous date run from 3.1856 to S.1884, only one coin having not been

discovered. No gold coins of this type have been encountered and only one half rupee \_is kmewn to the authers.

Apart from the pipal leaf there are a few other symbols to be found on the same line as

the date. The flower mark is retained to the left of the leaf but on most specimens it is off the flan. Om a rupee of S.1869 a curious mark resembling a C is found to the right of the date. This mark appears intermittently on this type and on a rupee of 5.1879 the flower mark WW is placed beside it, From 5.1882 to S.1884 a few additional marks eg غ3‎ 2 may be observed and it is probable that they are personal marks of the mint master,

Type IV Au mohur, Weight: 10.85 grams. Diameter 20 mm! Ar rupee. Weight: 11 - 11.1 grams. Diameter: 22 - 24 mm. Ob. As Type II Rev. As Type II Known dates. Mohur: S.1884/88

-Rupees: S.1884/87. S.1884/88 S.1884/89 S.1884/90 S.1884/91 S.1884/92

S.1885/95" S.1885/96" $$ $.1885/1902v $$ $$ $.1885/1903 $$

This type is identical to Type III but is characterised by the dual dating systen,

to which reference has already been made in the notes relating to the coins of the Amritsar mint. v7

There may be said to be two varieties of this type (a) with the fixed date of S.1884

on the reverse and the last two figures of the true date on the obverse and (b) with the fixed date of S.1885, otherwise the same.

If the same procedure regarding this system of dating was followed at Lahore as well as Amritsar then the dates of variety (a) should rum from S.1884/85 to S.1884/93 and

those of (b) from S.1885/93 to S.1885/1905. There does however seem to be a lack of specimens which would bear out this supposition. It may be that the Lahore mint commenced this system some time after Amritsar had started it or that production at Amritsar was so prolific that minting at Lahore, which is no great distance from Amritsar, was allowed to decline and struck coins only spasmodically. The prevalence of Amritsar rupees compared to those of Lahore suggests that this may have been the case.

The only coin other than rupees that has been found is a gold mohur, --- Weight: 11.2 grams. Diameter: 23 هم‎

Ob. The Guru Nanak seated receiving an offering

of flowers from his disciple Mardana,. Pennant in background.

# مس ب )‏wp اممه:‏woleB

# ere ب ارثا با‎ LL jl Weight: 11.4 grams. Diameter: 26mm Ob. As No.l but spray of flowers between figures and no date, Rev. As No.l but with date IANO (1885)

There has been some speculation as to whether these pieces are cains or religious medals, There is no information from any literary source but judging from the weight and size it is possible they were intended as presentation rupees on some particular occasion.

No.l is dated 5.1885 on the obverse and 5. (18)93 on the reverse. The true date corresponds to AD 1836-37. An opinion has been expressed that this piece, and possibly No. 2 also, were struck as presentation coins at the marriage of Nau Nihal Singh, the favourite grandson of Ranjit Singh. The marriage ceremony was performed at Attari (Between Amritsar and Lahore) on the 8th March 1837. This date - - just falls within the Samvat year 1893.  It is said that on this occasion one rupee was given as nazr to every inhabitant of the town of Attari. Whether it was the piece described above is a matter of conjecture.

No.2 is dated S.1885 only. There is no trace of a secondary date. The similarity between the coins is so obvious however, that both may well have been produced for the Same occasion. Both specimens are in the British Museum collection.
# STORY OF MULTAN

"A city existed on or near the site of Multan in ancient times. It was known as Mulasthanapura (the city of the temple of the sun), At the time of Alexander's

invasion of India it was the principal city of a people known as the Malli. Alexander on subjugating the Punjab took possession of Mulasthanapura and after the

Malli had made their submission to him he installed a certain Philip as satrap to

govern in his name, History does not record the ultimate fate of Philip but it is fairly certain that, not many years after the departure of Alexander, the Hindu kingdom of Magadha extended to the Indus. Multan was subsequently absorbed into the empire of Asoka, and formed part of the peripheral domains of the Kushan and Gupta dynasties.

At the time when the Arabs first penetrated the Indus valley, the Multan district was ruled by Chach, a Brahmin, who had usurped the throne of a monarch called

Sahasi Rai, the last monarch of a dynasty bearing the name of Rai. By the early 8th century the Arabs had penetrated the South Punjab and had taken Multan. With the subsequent decline of the Caliphate, however, its influence in Sind, the Punjab and the extremities became exceedingly weak, In A.D. 870 the Caliph Mua'tamid conferred upon Yakub ibn Lais the governorship of Sind, Balkh, Tukharistan, Sijistan and Kirman., The ties with the Caliphate gradually weakened and about A.D. 879 two independent states were established by the Arabs on the frontiers. One was in Sind, centred on Mansura, and the other in Multan,

About A.D. 976 Multan fell to the Karmathian heretics, who formed a government

under Hamid Khan, an Afghan of the Lodi family. About A.D. 978 the Amir of Ghazni, Sebuktegin, advanced into the Punjab and arrived at Multan. Hamid Khan submitted to him and was allowed to remain in power, Mahmud of Ghazni during his raids into India in the early part of the llth century twice visited Multan and incorporated the district in his empire but it was eventually wrested from him by the Sumras of Sind.

In A.D. 1175-76 Multan was attacked and taken by the Ghorids. The appointed governor of Sind and Multan under this dynasty was Nasir al din Qubacha, a Tirki Slave, who in A.D. 1206 declared himself independent. Following his death in A.D. 1224 his capital was beseiged and taken by Shams ud din Iltutmish the Sultan of

Delhi. From this period Multan remain subject to the Delhi Sultanate until its collapse after the invasion of Timur in A.D. 1397. Multan and the Southern Punjab then became independent under a Muslim tribe kmown as the Langas, This dynasty lasted until about A.D. 1526 when Multan was seized by Hussain Arghun of Sind on behalf of Humayun, In A.D. 1540 the district together with the Punjab passed into the possession of the Suris for a brief period. Multan finally passed into Mughal ~ control in A.D. 1555 when it was occupied by Akbar, who established it as the capital of a subah which included the sarkars of Dipalpur, Multan and Sakkar sub-divided into 88 parganas, Akbar established a mint at Multan in the 37th year of his reign and it remained a minting place of the Mughal Emperors until the time of Alamgir II, although Akbar's successor, Jehangir, does not appear to have minted there,

In 4.12. 1738, Zahid Khan, A Sadozai Afghan, was appointed by Muhammad Shah as Governor of Multan with the title of Nawab. In this year, however, India suffered a disastrous invasion by Nadir Shah and Multan fell to the invading Persians. After the departure of Nadir Shah, Multan was governed by a succession of Muslim

Governors who, although servants of the Delhi government, paid only lip service to the Mughal Emperor. After the formal cession of the Punjab to Ahmad Shah Durrani in 1752, Multan continued to be ruled by Muslim governors who now professed allegiance to the Afghan. In 1758 the Delhi governors called in the Marathas to enable them to expel Najib-ud-Daula, who by his own address and power and as agent of Ahmad Shah Durrani had become paramount in the imperial councils. The Marathas were able to occupy both Lahore and Multan in 1759 but were driven out by Ahmad Shah's fifth invasion and both places reverted to Afghan occupation.
After Ahmad Shah's last invasion in 1767 the Sikhs of the Bhangi misl under Jhanda Singh overran the Multan province, confining the Afghans to the city.

In 1771 the Sikhs were strong enough to launch an attack against the city but were beaten off by the joint forces of the Afghan governor and the Daudputras of Bahawalpur. These allies later quarelled and this dispute enabled Jhanda Singh to occupy the citadels of Multan. The Bhangi Sikhs were predominant in the Multan area for a number of years, possessing the strong fort at Mankera as well as Multan and levying taxes from the local landholders. Taimur Shah Durrani, who had succeeded his father in 1773, made two attempts to recapture Multan in 1777 and 1778 but was unsuccessful. In 177879 he appeared in person with an army before Multan. Ghanda Singh, the new leader of the Bhangi misl, was embroiled with other Sikh chiefs and his lieutenant surrendered the citadel to the Afghans after a brief show of resistance,

Taimur Shah installed Muzaffar Khan as Governor of Multan and thereafter the city

suffered no more Sikh raids until 1802 when Ranjit Singh marched towards it. When

thirty miles from it he treated with the Nawab and then retired. In 1806 Ranjit Singh made another demonstration towards Multan but was persuaded to retire on a payment of 70,000 rupees. He attacked again the following year and took part of the city. The citadel however held out and Ranjit Singh was again tempted with a heavy ransom to recall his forces, A further attempt to take Multan was made during the cold season of 1810 but the Sikh efforts were unsuccessful and Ranjit Singh retired in April after investing the fortress for some three months, In February 1818 the Sikhs entered the city and laid siege to the citadel yet again. The Afghans resisted until June when a Sikh band under Sadhu Singh made an entry by 2 surprise attack and made the capture of the citadel possible. Multan remained thenceforth within the

At the conclusion of the first Sikh War in 1846, the administration of Multan was

given to Diwan Mulraj, who combined his gubernatorial duties with the business of trade on a large scale. He was ultimately called upon by the Resident to render accounts. After some delay he intimated that he preferred to resign. Two British officers were sent to Multan to take over the fortress and to install the new Sikh governor appointed to succeed Mulraj. In April 1848, both these officers were attacked and murdered, probably at the instigation of Mulraj who rewarded the murderers for their deed. Mulraj promptly regained Multan with its fortress and in effect raised a rebellion against the Punjab adinistration. Steps were taken later in the year, during the cold season to retake Multan, The city was invested in September 1848 and, after a gallant defence, capitulated in January

The dates between which the various dynasties struck coins in Multan are given here:

Dates Dynasty and ruler A.D. A.z. 1719-1739 1132-1152 ¥ Muhammad Shah, Mughal Nadir Shah, Afsharid 1740-1748 1153-1161 Nuhammad Shah, Mughal 1748-2 1162-1165 11" Ahmad Shah Bahadur, Mughal $$ 1752=1757 $$ 1165-1170 Ahmad Shah Durrani 1757-9 1170-72 Taimur Shah Durrani as Nizam Ahmad Shah Durrani 1172-1173" Alamgir II Mughal 1760-1771 17# faimur Shah Durrani as Nizan 1772-1779 S.1829-1836 Sikhs 1780-1793 1194-7 Taimur Shah Durrani 1793-1800 1207-1215 Zaman Shah Durrani 1801-1803 1216-1218 Mahmud Shah Durrani 1803-1809 1218-4 Shuja al Mulk Shah, Durrani 1812-1818 1227-1233 Mahmud Shah Durrani \* 1818-1848 $$ $.1875-1905 $$ Sikhs

\* Copper coins continued to be struck in the name of Mahmud Shah Durrani as late

## as 55.4
# SIKH COINS OF THE MULTAN MINT

Type 1 Ar rupee. Weight: 11 grams. Diameter: 20 mm

# ba ‏ho سك

# يدر رن b ‏ral ‏he ولر Ob. Rev. iar \|

#?‏ee سولج سول او

Transliteration Cb. Deg tegh wa fath wa nasrat bedarang yafat az and translation Nanak Guru Gobind Singh = Abundance, the sword, victory and help without delay Guru Govind Singh obtained from Nanak,

Rev. Zarab Dar al Aman Multan, Sambat 1829, jalus maimanat manus $$ = $$ Struck at the Seat of Safety, Multan, in Sambat 1829, the year of prosperous accession.

Known Dates: Rupees: S.1829 S.1830 58.1831 S.1832 S.1835 5.1834 8.1835 6

The rupees struck by the Sikhs in Multan during their occupation of eight years are

the same in style to those issued contemporaneously in Lahore. The same obverse legend was adopted and the only difference on the reverse is the name of the mint with the epithet of Dar al Aman (the abode of safety), first used for this mint

in AH 1070 (AD 1659-60), during the reign of Aurangzeb.

Rupees dated for every year of the Sikh occupation have been examined and this would

appear to be the only denomination struck. Sikh gold of this type is unknown.

A number of symbols occur on these rupees and they all appear to be variations of a

flower. That on the rupee dated S.1829 is to the left of the date; on succeeding dates they are to the right.

The symbols are as follows: WwW \|JAT4 سر ا ل © بعرم & مرسسإ & سم‎ @

## IAro 5 جسم‎ --- Ar rupee. Weight: 11.1 grams. Ob. Diameter: 22-24 mm

# تيغ نالك وإسب ol ‏ee

# ye ‏ij كو بئد ‏ni نص نا شأ من ae a DP POF زد‎ NO Rev. As type I Ob. Transliteration and translation

Sikka zad bar seem wazir az fath Gobind Singh fazal sachha shahan sahib tegh

az Nanak wahib ast $$ = $$ Coin struck in gold and silver through the victory of Govind Singh obtained by the grace of the true king of kings from the sword of Nanak, 4s Type I Rev. Known dates S.1875 S.1881' S.1887 5.2699 ٠ Rupees: S.1876 5 2 S.1888 3.1894 S.1900

# S.1877 S.1883

# 5.1889 S.1895 S.1901

# 8.1878 S.1884 8.1902

# S.1879 S.1885 S.1891 S.1897 3.1903

# S.1880 S.1886 S.1892 S.189€ S.1904

# S.1905

Following the capture of Multan in AD.1818 by Ranjit Singh, the Sikhs again

commenced striking coins there following closely the type of the Lahore mint. The Multan coins are somewhat cruder and they deteriorated with the passage of time. The script is poorly engraved and the legends become so gross that only a fraction of the whole may be observed on the flan.

This type of rupee was issued until the annexation of the Punjab by the British, Rupees of every year have been noted.

No fractional silver has come to light and gold coins are unknown.

The symbols that occur on these coins become more numerous towards the end of the

series, Qn the reverse, the pipal leaf is always present to the left of the date and is sometimes accompanied by another small mark, From S.1876 the curious 0 mark appears to the right of the date, Om the obverse there is a trident on coins dated S.1880 to S.1884. In S.1885 this is replaced by a flower which by 3.1890 is recognisable as a tulip. A flower was a popular mark on Mughal and Durrani coins

of Multan, and was first used on the coins of Aurangzeb. See Appendix 4.
Miscellaneous es Au rupee. Weight:.65 gram Diameter: 11 m معي ات سيد‎ 14-2 ale 7? y, "i are, Ob. رو‎ Rev. oper

Transliteration 05.  Sahaya satguru $$ = $$ The true teacher may help and translation Rev. 1905 ecceee Mundarka

These small gold coins do not bear a mint name but have always been attributed to Multan presumably on the basis of hearsay carried down from the mid 19th century. Fairly recently some documentary evidence came to light which tends to confirm this attribution. Ina note of 1864, the Commissioner at Amritsar, writing in respect of a proposed gold coinage for India mentioned "When Mulraj was besieged in Multan, being short of silver to pay his troops but having 40 lakhs of rupees hoarded in gold, he coined the whole of it into pieces which passed for one rupee." The date on these coins is further confirmation. 'The seige of Multan lasted from September 1848 until 22 January 1849; this period falling in the Samvat year 1905.

That Mulraj had gold worth 4 million rupees at his disposal is somewhat improbable. The rupee in those days was roughly the equivalent of two English shillings so it

is unlikely that the treasury in Multan contained as much as £800,000 worth of gold bullion,

The obverse legend has been read as above and could be taken as a supplication to the Guru Nanak for help for the besiesed Sikhs. The meaning of the word Mundarka, if that is the correct reading, has not been ascertained. @eeeeseeeeeeeeseeseeeeeseeeeee Bibliography:

Domrow RB. Two Tiny Sikh Coins. ل‎.11.5.1٠. Vol. XXXV. 1973.

Rodgers C.J. On the Coins of the Sikhs. J.A.S.B. Vol.L. Rodgers C.J. Catalogue of the Coins

collected by C.J.Rodgers & purchased by the Government of the Punjabs Part II. Calcutta, 1894.

Rodgers C.J. Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum. Part II. Calcutta, 1894.

Wiggins K. Sikh Gold Rupees. JoN.S.I. Vol.AL. 1978. Punjab Gazzetteer. 1914.

Catalogue White King Collection. Part IV. Schulman, Amsterdam, 1905.

Thanks are due to the following for their assistance in compiling this paper:

N.G.thodes, C.K.Panish, N.M.Lowick, Helen Mitchell-Brown, T.R.Volk, J.Longen.
# a2

# APPSNDIA A. " $$ = $$ Tr + - - Tr. + +4 \| + ١ 1+4 4+ H4 44 ا‎ aa

# LH es san;: a \> الجأ‎ ie H ل‎ it HOTT SEL LLL Hit \[avg hi: ao \| iT eee +4 \| J Ht 4-1-4 i.-4 1444-4-1 aa tH

## 1 ل‎ "at \{

# 1 ل الم‎ \| \| 8  ١ 5

# s H \} \|

## Ly il ': \|! \| "0 ا \| ل ++ \| + +4 ا!1!4ل!\[ل‎ enna

# OL Ss ++H م‎ ١ +44141م‎ H

## ut \| \|! ا‎

## a َ H >. my wT? \| \| He eee 1-1 1 + HY الج‎ 4 -+

# i iy \| \|\| eee eee - - +4 i mile \|: 4  41١ 1 4 1 ل4+4140141ص‎

# 414-41 \| ١ 8 ب‎ +4 rr ttre rth

# NL\]: dH UE \| HH Hh

# J 6 ل4ل4114ا\]‎ eee iif: \| ' مل‎ af  ١ +H ١ ean +4 \| 4 ١ H +444 h:

## المال‎ I HRS i Se Peto A BS \| 95080 ا‎ §

# HUSEEDE J J /:

‏ee وسوس سر سه