# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel, Mr. M. R. Broome,

UK ع‎ Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins, Newsletter Editor Mr. S. Goron, America: Mr. W. 8. Warden, Jr.,

Annual Subscription $$ £6.00; H. Fl. 25; FF 75; $10. $$ South Asia: Mr. P. P. Kulkarni, Regional Secretaries

General: Mr. G. P. Hennequin, 3 NEWSLETTER No. 116

## January - February 1989

This month's contributor to be featured is Bob Senior. Bob was born in December 1944 in Manchester. His first interest in coins began when he started attending Grammar School and discovered that an old coin that his father had given him was as old as 1816! He rapidly began to specialise and concentrated on Short Cross pennies, forming a very good collection. Prof. - C. Thompson then introduced him to Jndian coins and sent a dealer to his house with a very large cabinet of Mughal coins. He was hooked. Between 1965 and 1967 he was the Secretary of the Lancashire and Cheshire Numismatic Society but when his first teaching post took him out of Manchester he resigned. In 1971 he went on an overland trip by himself to India and on the way while working as a volunteer on an Israeli kibbutz met his wife Hilde, a German theology student from Tiibingen University on holiday.

In 1972 they set up home in Hamburg where Bob taught at the International School and from where he applied unsuccessfully every year for posts in India, Pakistan and Afghanistan! In 1979 they came to live in the UK at Butleigh Court and Bob began dealing in Oriental coins full (nel His original collections which was very extensive, was sold and now he collects only Indo-Scythic, Indo-Parthian and Satrap coins of which he has the finest collection in existence. Bob publishes numismatic books and travels to India/ Pakistan three or four times a year looking for new material. Bob and Hilde have 4 sons and a great love of music owning some 45 instruments in all. Bob's whole life has revolved around his two hobbies, music and coins, and, now, of course, his family.

A number of articles by Bob on Indo-Scythic coins will be published in future Newsletters. ONS News

The meeting held in London on 5 November attracted over 20 members including some from overseas. Tony Holmes gave a short talk on some aspects of Java coinage and an auction raised £104 for Society funds. Our thanks are due to Spink & Son

Ltd for donating a number of coins. The next ONS meeting in London will be held on Saturday 8 April 1989, from 14.15 at 9 Montague Street, W.C.1. --- Recent Publications 1. More articles in World Coin News:

- "General 'Chinese' Gordon" by John G. Humphris (vol. 15, no. 46. November 15, 1988). ii. "Australian finds huge cache of cash" by K. Courtenay (vol. 15, no. 47, November 22, 1988). This article mentions the discovery of a hoard of 32,000 cash coins (earliest dated 618 AD) in Queensland, says very little about the coins but gives an interesting insight into the experiences of Chinese gold-seekers in the Queensland of the 1870s. iii. "'Holyland hoard uncovered" (vol. 15, no. 48, November 29, 1988). A hoard of 755 copper-bronze prutah coins from the Bar Kochba Revolt period (133 AD). iv. ''What Chu used for money" by J. Caseria (vol. 15, no. 48).

2. Spink Numismatic Circular for December 1988 has two items of potential interest to members:

- "Victorious Indo-Parthians' by R. C. Senior. On some coins of Gondophares and Abdagases. ii. "A Hoard of Mamluk Silver Dirhems' by M. Broome & S. Bendall. This hoard comprises 748 coins of mainly Mamluk silver of the period AH 695-700.

3. 'Paper Money of South Vietnam' by Nguyen Van Phung, a collectors' guide and reference book. Available for $12.95 (plus $2 postage & handling in USA) from: Todd & Honeywell, Inc., Ten Cuttermill Road, Great Neck, NY 11021, USA. Abbasid: Al-Mustazhir - Aman Ur Rahman

I present below a hitherto unpublished, and perhaps unique coin of the 47th Caliph, the Abbasid, ABU'L ABBAS AHMAD AL-MUSTAZHIR BILLAH (487-512AH) citing only his own name and that of his son with no mention of the actual Temporal Ruler, Rukn al-din Barkiyaruq.,

Weight 3.31.ع‎ Dia. 25.7 mm. (max.) Mint - Madinat-es-Salam. Date 491 AH.

# Legends OBVERSE REVERSE: (Lv) للك‎ Field

# WY) JIU > UH و حر ل‎ WW وسو ل‎

## "yr"

I \|, يرال ومن‎ Age و‎ Inner margin السلمم‎ sy A') هزا‎ wp) <a" SIN x50

# Outer margin

(Surah 9, Ayat 33 in part) (Surah 30, Ayat 4 & 5 in part) لحر و بو ملق‎ So للك نسومالا مل‎ Sb أو سلر يا‎ WW) ر "مول‎ oF

# TRANSLITERATION ITA 3 Shy كلل‎

FIELD Al Imam Lillah La Illaha Ililah Muhammad Wahda La Sharika La Rasul Allah Al-Mustazhir Billah Salla Allahu 'alayhi Amir al-Muminin \* Left: Abu Mansur Right: Umdat al-din

As-Sayuti names him Abu Mansur al Fadl-b-al-Mustazhir. He was known as Umdat ud dunya wa uddin, pillar of the state and of religion.
# INNER MARGIN

# OUTER MARGIN

# TRANSLATION

# FIELD

# INNER MARGIN

Bismillah Zuriba Haza Al-Dinar Bi Madinat Es-Salam Sanat Ahdi Wa Tis'in Wa Arba'mi'at Lillaahil' Amr Min-Qablu Wa Min Ba'd: Wa

| Yawma- Iziny- | Yafrahul-Mu-Minunna. | Bi Nasriallah. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| The Imam | There is no god but God | is without associate... |
| Al Mustazhir Billah | Commander of the | Faithful |

The Imam There is no god but God is without associate... Al Mustazhir Billah Commander of the Faithful In the name of God, this dinar was minted

Mohammad Rasul Allah Arsala Bil-Hudaa Wa Diinal Haqqi Li-Yuzhi-Rahnu' Aladdiini Kulli-Hii Wa Law Karihal-Mushrikum

For God Mohammad (the) Apostle of God May God's benedictions

be upon him. Left: Father of Mansur (Kunya) Right: Pillar of Religion (Laqab)

Mohammad Apostle of God He hath sent with at Madinat as Salam in guidance and religion the year 491. of truth to proclaim it over all religions even though the Pagans may detest (it).

OUTER MARGIN With Allah is the decision, in the past and in the future: On that day shall the Believers rejoice - with the help of Allah.

Al-Mustazhir ascended the caliphate in 487 AH, at the age of 16, on the death of his father, Mostader Billah, during the rule of the Great Seljuq Barkiyaruq.

As-Sayuti quoting ibn u'l Athir, writes that al-Mustazhir was of gentle manners, of generous disposition, zealous in good works, a fine penman, skilful in the royal rescripts, indicating considerable merit and extensive knowledge. He was humane and liberal and a patron of the learned and the virtuous. His tenure of the Caliphate was not free from trouble for the times he lived in were turbulent and occupied with frequent wars.

Muir, in his book on the Caliphate writes that during his 25 years incumbency there was fanatical strife at home and Jerusalem was lost to the crusaders (492 AH) yet the Caliph's name is hardly ever noticed.

De Marigny records that no sooner had al-Mustazhir ascended the Caliphate, when Barkiyaruq's rule was threatened by his cousins and brothers then governing the Eastern Provinces. Over the next few years, starting 488 AH, Barkiyaruq campaigned in the East under varying fortunes and the affairs at Baghdad remained in suspense over the outcome. It was during Barkiyaruq's stay in Khorasan when he had overcome the threat of Arslan Shah and was confronted with the rebellion led by a son of his father's chief minister, that al-Mustazhir seems to have had coins minted in his name without acknowledgement of an overlord.

My friend and 'Ustad', Robert Darley-Doran, is of the opinion that al-Mustazhir may have struck coins in his own name, in 491 AH, as Barkiyaruq's leadership was then weak due to the civil war going on and because of his annoyance at the Sultan for ignoring his appeal against the crusaders' activities in Syria and Palestine.

There are two historical references to the possible issue of coins by al-Mustazhir: as-Sayuti states that "in the year 496 AH seditions occurred against the authority of the sultan and the preachers omitted the prayer for him, and restricted themselves to the prayer for the caliph and no other." While in writing of the life of al-Mustazhir's son, al-Mustarshid, as-Sayuti quotes as-Subki, an author on Shafiite doctrine, that 'this father (al-Mustazhir) included him (al-Mustarshid) in the Khutbah as his heir and engraved his name on the coinage in Rabi'al Awal, 488 AH.

The date on the coin indicates very clearly the year of mintage as 491 AH. It is quite possible that either as-Sayuti, writing his history in the 10th Hijri century could have missed the dates by a few years or even that the translator or the copyist of the manuscript itself could have made this error.

Acknowledgement 1 am grateful to Robert Darley-Doran for his help in reading the legends and his note on the historical background. References:

The Caliphate, its rise, decline and fall - Sir William Muir, London, 1891. History of the Caliphs - Jalaluddin as Sayuti, translated by Major H. S. Jarrett, Calcutta, 1881. The History of the Arabians under the Government of the Caliphs - Abbe de Marigny, English translation by anonymous translator, London,

1758. History of the Arabs - Philip K. Hitti, London, 1946. Translation & Transliteration from the Holy Quran - English translation by Abdullah Yusuf Ali, Lahore, 1986.
## Dinar of Madinat al-Mahdiyah 450H struck by the Zirid ruler al-Mu'izz b. Badis (406/454H) in the name of the Fatimid al-Mustansir (427/487H) - Tawfiq Ibrahim

Madinat al-Mahdiyah, 450H. 4gr. 23 mm. This date is apparently unpublished and is the only known case of the word '"'Madinat" affixed in front of the mint name عله‎ Mahdiyah. Obverse field Reverse field

yb لا اله الا اله‎ i i pi Je" f حده لا شريك له‎ llustrati wh. و‎

# على ولى الله مير نيشنموملا‎

# Obverse margin

Bola Ny بسم الله ضرب هدا رانيدلا بمدينة 'ةيدبملا نيسمح ةنس ‎

## Reverse margin: Koran 61.9 till on

After Mu'izz's total defeat in 449H, at the hands of the Hilali tribes sent against him by the Fatimid al-Mustansir, the Zirid ruler evacuated Qayrawan and retreated to al-Mahdiyah. It is quite evident from the present coin and a few rare coins of the years 449, 451, and 453H (all single entries, respectively Hazard! 15, 16, & 17) that Mu'izz returned to Fatimid suzerainty after this punishing defeat.

These coins are important as our only evidence of this volte-face. The Sunnite sources are manifestly mute about Mu'izz's return to the Fatimid fold. This contrasts with the profuse information they give us on Mu'izz's pro-Sunnite rebellion of a decade earlier. (For the numismatics of the rebellion see Hazard no.1 to 14.)

1. Harry W, Hazard: The Numismatic History of Late Medieval North Africa, New York, 1952.

Malwa - some observations on the coinage of Mohammed II

Shortly before he died, Nasir Shah of Malwa (AH 906-916)/ AD 1500-1510) nominated his third son 'Azam Humayun his successor with the title Sultan Mahmud Shah. This followed a rebellion by his eldest son, Shihab-ud-din, who had previously been nominated his successor, and who subsequently felt unable to be reunited to his father. Mahmud duly ascended the throne in AH 917 (AD 1511) but his accession was immediately challenged by Shihab-ud-din, with the help of various disaffected nobles. Some military activity took place but later in the year Shihab-ud-din fell ill and died. This, however, was only the signal for further problems for Mahmud to arise. His ambitious Wazir, Muhafiz Khan, allied himself with Mahmud's other brother Prince Sahib Khan. This coalition caused Mahmud to flee the capital, Shadiabad (Mandu), whereupon Muhafiz Khan raised Sahib Khan to the throne with the title Sultan Mohammed. Thus, on 19 Jumada I 917, Malwa had two sultans - Mahmud, who was moving towards Ujjain, and Mohammed, who was occupying Shadiabad. Mahmud's position was strengthened by the arrival of Rai Chand Purbia, better known to history as Medini Rai. Moreover, with one or two key nobles changing sides, Mahmud was able to re-take Shadiabad on 16 Shawwal 917 (6 January 1512). Sahib Khan and Muhafiz Khan fled to Gujerat, where they were welcomed by Sultan Muzaffar II. Their stay in Gujerat, however did not last long.

Meanwhile, Mahmud was to confront another rebellion, this time by the Governor of Satwas, Sikandar Khan. This started in Jumada II 918 (August 1512). Sikandar succeeded in occupying a certain amount of territory but was soon forced into submission. That did not stop him from rebelling, unsuccessfully, again shortly afterwards. At the same time, Sahib Khan /Mohammad II was again becoming active especially in and around Chanderi, in concert with the Delhi Sultan, Sikandar Lodi, and Bihjat Khan. On 16 Rabi' II 919 (21 June 1513) Muhafiz Khan was killed in battle, and Sahib Khan found it prudent to settle with Mahmud. It was not long, however, before Sahib Khan felt himself betrayed and deserted by his supporters and he fled from Malwa on 9 Ramazan 919 (8 November 1513), and went to the army of Sikandar Lodi, which was camped just beyond the Malwa border. It is reported by Firishta and Nizam-ud-din that Sahib Khan returned to Chanderi with the Delhi contingent and there he was proclaimed Sultan of Malwa again, but in name only. This situation could not be tolerated by Mahmud, who attacked the Delhi forces and re-occupied Chanderi on 19 Shawwal 920 (7 December 1514). Whether this last date is correct is uncertain because coins struck in the name of Mohammed II are known with the years 921 and 922.

Coins of Mohammed II are known in silver and copper. They are scarce and conform to the usual Malwa pattern. Hitherto the silver coinage was represented by a small number of square half tankas weighing around 5.4 grams, and dated AH 917 and AH 921. The 917 coins have Mohammed's kunya as Abu'! Muzaffar, whereas the 921 coin in the author's collection bears the kunya Abu'! Fath. The square copper coins come in various weights. Those dated 917 (9.8-10g, 4.92, 4.0g,

2.5g) have the same swastikatf+mint mark as the 917 half tanka. The copper coins of year 921, weighing 8.5-8.75g) bear the same heart shaped mintmark 4 as the 921 half tanka. The coins of year 922 weigh between 8 and 9 grams and tend to be somewhat cruder than those of the previous year. They also generally bear the heart-shaped mintmark,جم‎ often found on the coins of Mahmud II (including all years of the period under review) and those of earlier rulers. As this mintmark also features on the copper coin of Ibrahim Lodi (now in the British Museum), supposedly issued to commemorate his occupation of Chanderi sometime between 923 and 925 (Thomas, Chron. p.377), this suggests that the latter copper issues of Mohammed II were also struck at Chanderi. Interestingly enough, a silver coin of Ibrahim Lodi, Malwa style has now come to light. This was the subject of a paper given by Dr. S. K. Bhatt at the 10th International Numismatic Congress a couple of years ago. The date on the coin is very incomplete but may be 923. It bears the 4) mint mark similar to the mark on the 921 % tanka of Mohammed Shah. Is this the silver equivalent of the () mark that occurs on copper coins? If so, then it is possible to postulate that the 917 coins were struck at Shadiabad during Mohammed's brief occupation of that city, whilst the later coins were struck at Chanderi. Does anybody have any coins of Mohammed II dated 918-920?
Mr Gobind Vallabh Agrawal has kindly sent photographs of a % tanka of Mohammed II. This coin bears legends similar to those on most of the published % tankas of earlier Malwa rulers.

# بعلار هلل با (date below - off coin)

'"'To Allah (belongs) the greatness" Mohammed Shah Khalji son of Nasir Shah Weight 2.8g. 12.5 mm.

The use of the mint mark suggests that the coin was struck in 921. Notes

For historical background I have used "Medieval Malwa, A Political & Cultural History 1401-1562" by Upendra Nathday, published by Munshi Ram Manohar Lal, Delhi, 1965. It is surprising that this book makes no mention of Sahib Khan/Mohammed II after AH 920, since the coins dated 921 and 922 were published long before the book. 2.  Data on coins have been obtained from: - H. Nelson Wright: The Coinage of the Sultans of Malwa, published in the Numismatic Chronicle, vol XII, Fifth series. iii - R. Singhal: On Certain Unpublished Coins of the Sultans of Malwa, published in the Numismatic Supplement XLVII, of the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. III, 1937. iii. Specimens in the author's collection, and elsewhere as mentioned above. In his paper, mentioned above, Dr Bhatt illustrates a half tanka of Mohammed Shah II dated 917, with the mintmark يك‎ 8. L.G. Mughal Miscellany

1. A rupee marking Akbar's initial conquest of Bengal

Between AH 960 and 971 (AD 1552-63) much of Bengal was ruled by members of a Suri dynasty. The precise extent of their domains is difficult to ascertain; it is probable that their sway extended into parts of Bihar whilst a good deal of Eastern Bengal seems to have been in the hands of local chieftains, not to mention the Portuguese. In 971 (1563) Sulaiman Kararani, one time governor of Bihar under Sher Shah Suri seized power in Bengal, but died the following year.! His elder son, Bayazid, succeeded him briefly before being assassinated and replaced by his younger brother Daud. Whereas Sulaiman had acknowledged Akbar's authority, Daud did not, going so far as to invade Mughal territory to the West. Akbar sent Mun'im Khan against him and Daud was forced to retreat to Patna where he was besieged. Difficulties experienced by Mun'im during the siege persuaded Akbar to set out himself. He captured Hajipur and then Patna. Daud meanwhile had fled and Akbar pursued him as far as Daryapur. Mun'im then re-joined Akbar and was given the task of completing the conquest of Bengal while Akbar returned to Delhi. Mun'im made good progress and was soon in occupation of Daud's capital, Tanda. From there the Mughal armies captured Ghoraghat, Satgaon and Burdwan. After meeting with some resistance, they defeated Daud at the battle of Bajhaura and the latter subsequently sued for peace. All this took place in the year 982 (1574-5). Mughal rejoicing, however, was to prove short-lived as Daud again rebelled and it took another couple of years before Daud was finally caught and executed in 984, and Bengal became once again part of the Mughal empire.

The rupee published here was struck at Satgaon in 982 and must have been issued to mark the Mughal occupation of the town mentioned above. Satgaon, the ancient Saptagrama, had been an important commercial port for centuries. Coins were struck there in the name of the Delhi Sultan, Muhammad bin Tughluq? and Sher Shah? and Islam Shah Suri\* as well as Jalal Shah5. Other coins bear the legend 'Arsah Satgaon® or Mulk Satgaon', apparently referring to the administrative area or even province of Satgaon. Towards the end of his reign in 943/944 (1536/7) Mahmud III of Bengal had given the Portuguese® important commercial powers in Satgaon (and Chittagong) in return for assistance rendered in his defence against Sher Shah Suri. The city was situated on the river Saraswati, through which flowed the main stream of the Hughli river. But in the second half of the 16th century AD the course of the main stream changed causing the river Saraswati to silt up. As a result, larger vessels could no longer reach Satgaon, and that city declined in importance, to be replaced by the growing city of Hughli a little to the south. Hughli was founded by the Portuguese, who at this period virtually controlled the eastern seaboard and enjoyed extensive commercial powers. What role, if any, the Portuguese played in the conflict between the Mughals and Daud Kararani is unclear.

## Obverse Reverse

## سا‎

Kalima اسوار عا‎ mint mark: &% Is oj \| a 0-4 AEs) YS

## "kK., Margins: حرو تركو حظا‎ right: - عر‎  weight: 11.37 grams bottom: علىا عى د‎ diameter: 28 mm. Mohammad Akbar left: الم نعم‎ Badshah Ghazi top: ws le Jalal-ud-din Zarb Satgaon \|
The legend in the obverse margins is unread. It does not appear to be one of those usually occurring on Akbar's pre-Ilahi rupees. The reverse is unusual for a pre-Ilahi rupee in having the mint-name in the field rather than in a margin. It is also interesting to note that Satgaon is in fact spelt Satgaon ) كو ن‎ caw ( rather than Satganu ( 9 Ju.) as appears on earlier coins from this mint. Notes

1.  For this historical narrative I have referred to the Cambridge History of India, vol. IV, Mughal India, New Delhi 1963 edition. This

history is not always clear as to dates of events. - Nelson Wright, The Coinage and Metrology of the Sultans of Delhi, reprinted New Delhi 1974, coin numbers 485, 498, 499.

- Nelson Wright, op. cit., coin numbers 1035, 1036. - Nelson Wright, op. cit., coin numbers 1287-1290. Unpublished coin in R. L. Rampuria collection, Calcutta, India. = Nelson Wright, IMC Catalogue vol. II, reprinted Delhi 1972, coins 56-58 of Sikandar b. Iliyas, coins 78-81, 84 of Ghiyas-ud-din

'Azam, etc, - Mitchiner, The World of Islam, Sanderstead 1977, coin number 2799, wrongly attributed to Arakan. - J. A. Campos, History of the Portuguese in Bengal, Calcutta edition 1979. Mahmud Shah allowed the Portuguese to build factories in

both Satgaon and Chittagong amd gave them control of both custom-houses. 6 سكيم‎ Ye oS 2. A Presentation Rupee of Akbar

Dr Becker has sent some details of a large, thin rupee of Ilahi type from the mint of Agra. The coin is dated Ilahi 47, month of Farwardin, and weighs 11.41 grams. The 7 of 47 seems to have been recut over a 6. A similar coin of year 47, month of Mihr, exists in a private collection in India. These two coins have legends similar to those occurring on the normal Ilahi rupees of Agra! of year 44, but the present coins have clearly been struck from specially prepared, highly ornamented dies.

1. R. B. Whitehead, Lahore Museum Catalogue vol. II, reprinted Lahore 1977, coins 245-6. 3. Akbar, an 1/8 dam of Ajmir

Akbar's dams from Ajmir and Salimabad Ajmir are well known. Published here is an 1/8 dam of Ajmir dated AH 979, weighing 2.4 grams.. فلو س‎ > Use Rev: partsof و‎ Jow

# WV9

## Obv: parts of P= Siew

# نيدم صر ب‎ يمحار 4. A % rupee of Rafi'-ud-Darjat

Half rupees of Rafi'-ud-Darjat are very unusual. Dr Becker has sent details of such a coin in his collection from the mint of Shahjehanabad (Dar-ul-Khilafat). The coin bears year Ahd and weighs 5.74 grams. The legends are as on the rupee coins from that mint.

Further evidence on the lead/tin '"'Khmer'' coins of South-East Asia - M. Robinson

In ONS Newsletter 99! I cast doubt on the attribution to the Khmer period of the lead floral design coins commonly found in Thailand. This was on the basis of one such specimen having been dug up at a 16th century Portuguese site at Ayudhya. Support for my views was subsequently given by R. S. Wicks in Newsletter 1012. At the time of writing the article I had no detailed account of the exact find spot of the lead piece and the Chinese cash coin exhibited in the museum at Ayudhya.

Since then I have obtained an excellent booklet? describing the excavations carried out at the village of Sao Pedro, in which the church of Sao Domingus lay. The settlement was first built in the late 16th century by the Portuguese. Excavations were made on 5 x 5 metre grids, with reference a letter followed by a number, e.g. A3. The booklet lists 81 items unearthed, the vast majority of which were from the 16th - 17th centuries or later. Only 2 were earlier. No. 61 - a Sukhotai

13th century terracotta model of a mother nursing a baby, and No. 68 - a Chinese 13th- 14th century earthenware jar found along the southern wall.
The coins found were as follows: No. 11 - a Chinese copper cash, 25 mm, "Tsun Jeu Thong Pao"' of 1644, site C12, depth 200-250 cm. No. 12 - Spanish silver 8 rials 1791, 34 mm, site B7, depth 0 - 100 cm. No. 13 - Thai copper 1 fuang of 1898, 30 mm, site C8, depth 0 - 100 cm. No. 14 - tin coin, 18 mm, site B11, depth 100 - 150 cm. "This is a circular coin with a hole in the centre and a flower petal design on both faces. It may have been a counter or gambling chip. The design is known among the villagers as \*'Dok Mai Phra Ruang"', the Phra Ruang flower."' No. 15 - Copper VOC coin, 1745, 20 mm, site E5, depth 200 - 250 cm. No. 16 - Silver ''pod duang'', 7 mm, unidentified marking, site E5, depth 200 - 250 cm. No. 41 - 5 Cowrie shells, around 17 x 23 mm, found at several spots. Numbers 11 and 14 are clearly the two coins I mentioned previously. In the same grid as 14, and in the same stratum, were found a Portuguese style ivory bar-shaped rosary of the 16th-17th centuries (No. 21) and a 16th-17th centuries Ayudhya style terracotta model of a horse's head (No. 59). Item 21 is particularly important as it clearly cannot predate the 16th century, the earliest Portuguese occupation.

The above evidence is I think fairly conclusive that the lead pieces are not Khmer. Based on the date for objects with a narrowly defined date period, I suggest that the likely date for No. 14 is 17th century, possibly 18th, but less likely 19th. However, as Wicks points out, many of the similar coins currently on sale are probably modern forgeries. I suggest that any in immaculate condition should be viewed with particular suspicion.

It may of course be argued that the fact that one specimen is from the 17th century or thereabouts does not rule out the possibility that others may be earlier. This is true, but so far there is no evidence to my knowledge of these floral pieces having been found at a definitely Khmer site, and I don't think this is likely. We can at the least now discount the theory that they are an exclusively Khmer issue. A Khmer origin would seem to me to require an inacceptably long time scale spanning different cultures. References

1+ "The lead "Khmer" coins of South East Asia', M. Robinson, ONS Newsletter 99, December 1985, p.3-4. '\*Further notes on the lead '"'Khmer"' coins of South-East Asia", R. S. Wicks, ONS Newsletter 101, June 1986, p.4-5. 3.  '\*The Portuguese and Ayutthaya', An exhibition on the occasion of the National Day of Portugal, 10 June 1985. (This publication is available from the White Lotus Company, Bangkok).

A non-numismatic copper object of the Liao dynasty (?) - Kenneth M. MacKenzie

Many years ago I corresponded with some friends about the object illustrated below and was encouraged to retain it in my modest collection of Chinese coins. A comment made by Bruce Smith persuaded me to assign it to the dynasty of the Ch'itan Tartars who were establishing their empire in the north and north east at the beginning of the tenth century, and whose rulers later (AD 937) called their dynasty Liao.

He informed me that "'fish'' tallies are referred to in Chinese historical works and were used by the military, since many were excavated in their sites which dated from the twelfth century or near that time. From the sources (military) he gleaned the facts that when the Emperor appointed a military commander he was given one half of a matching pair of tallies. The other half was kept at the palace in the possession of the Emperor. Routine orders to the armies could be sent to any superior authority, but if an Army had to be given a major order - attack the enemy, relocate the camp, return to the capital etc., the Emperor had to send his half of the tally to each commander affected by the order.

The specimen I have has the character fl T'ung on the reverse, and the matching half had the character حش‎ Ho. The meaning of the both would appear to be "an agreement" (or contract). The two halves would be brought together so that the rims matched.

Beneath the character T'ung, an inscription has been engraved in li shu (clerk's script). The fifth character on the right is not too clear, and the sixth character is indecipherable, but it seems to read:

at i 61 ع<‎ 1 75011, 24.73 grams. With patina.

The single character at the top left of the inscription is tht (2?pe), could mean "'attach''. Since the fish-head has been neatly pierced for suspension, perhaps on the clothing or uniform of the recipient, this seems logical.

The translation of the inscription is ''Left, Wu Wei, General + (?) sends this''; which presumably means, "General Wu Wei of the Left (Army group) conveys this." I recall that Dr F. A. Turk had, or knew of a similar object, also in the name of Wu Wei, but I am not sure if the T'ung or Ho character was cast on the reverse.

I have not come across such an object published in a catalogue or sales list but I may have missed seeing it in a recent publication from the People's Republic of China. I would be grateful if any member can tell me more about it. Forthcoming publication

Nicholas Rhodes's new book on Nepalese coinage is now at the printers. Publication is expected in the spring.
The Paul Balog Conference on Islamic Numismatics 17 - 19 October 1988

To mark the 6th anniversary of the death of Dr. Paul Balog the Israel Museum recently arranged a conference in Jerusalem on Islamic Numismatics. A dermatologist by profession, practicing for much of his life in Egypt, Balog was better known to numismatists around the world for his studies of the coins of the three great dynasties of Islamic Egypt, the Fatimids, the Ayyubids, and the Mamluks.

He bequeathed his collection of over 7000 coins and his library of some 2000 books to the Israel Museum so that students could have access to the reference material needed for further studies in this area. In conjunction with the conference, the Museum had organised an exhibition of some of his coins and of some of the magnificent examples of Islamic metalwork, textiles, and carpets that Balog had acquired during his lifetime.

Amongst the many numismatic delicacies on show in the main section of the Museum under the enthusiastic and knowledgeable direction of Prof. Ya'akov Meshorer were a large hoard of silver clippings from jewellery, dated to the 10th century B.C., a hoard of Umayyad dinars that included two of the rare AH77 issue, and a votive offering of copper coins, from the wall of a house, that was the exact equivalent of half a silver shekel, including the correct allowance for the money changer's commission! This was the tax demanded in order to be accepted as a practising Jew.

At the conference itself, the 13 speakers included two each from the USA, Germany, and the UK and one from France, six of them being members of ONS. The programme is set out below and it will be seen that the subjects covered, although

concentrating on coins circulating in Palestine, examined many different areas and topics including a challenge to the traditional account of the development of Islam, made by Professor Sharon.

By courtesy of the Israel Numismatic Society, delegates were invited to evening receptions in the homes of two of their members and the conference concluded with a splendid formal dinner arranged by Dr. Martin Weyl, the Director of the Israel Museum, at a restaurant overlooking the walls of the Old City of Jerusalem. For those who could stay on for another day, a tour of the Old City had been arranged under the expert guidance of the Director of Archaeological Excavations to see both the traditional sites and the latest discoveries in this most historic of cities.

For any student of Islamic Numismatics, this conference provided an excellent opportunity to acquire new ideas, and insights into old ideas, in a setting close to that in which some of the coins originally circulated. The facility to study Balog's collection of coins, with access to his library, is being made available to all serious scholars on application to Professor Ya'akov Meshorer, Curator of Coins at the Israel Museum, POB 1299, 91012 JERUSALEM, Israel. Conference Programme - Milskin: A hoard of Arab-Byzantine coins

- Kalus: Coin hoards from the early centuries of Islam in the Islamic territories. - Qedar: Umayyad copper coinage of Syria.

- Sharon: Numismatic material as a key factor for the re-evaluation of early Islamic history.

- Barag: The meaning of the Menorah on the Umayyad coinage of Jerusalem. - Meshorer: The Islamic coinage of Jerusalem.

Mr. Sraga Qedar, ONS member - Bacharach: Ikhshidid coins.

and member of conference - D. Nicol: Islamic coinage in imitation of Fatimid types.

## organising committee

- 8. Curtis: Salah-ud-din and the Jazirah campaigns of 578h and 581h: the evidence of the figured coins. - Popp: Ayyubid coins of Yemen.

- R. Broome: Questions raised by the new 'Dirham' coinages of the late 6th century of the Hijra.

- & R. Amitai-Preiss: Some remarks on Hulegu's early coinage.

- Ilisch: Changes of types and the emission system of the Syrian copper coinage of the 8th century AH/14th century AD.

- N. Singh: Coins bearing the names of Muhammad bin Sam and Prithviraja III: reappraisal. Michael Broome

Mrs R. Ofek, ONS member and archivist at the L.A. Mayer Institute for Islamic Art, Jerusalem.

We wish all our readers a very happy and numismatically successful 1989

Galataprint, Park House, Albert Road, Wolverhampton WV6 OAG, U.K