# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe Dr. H.J. van der Wiel Dr. M. B. Mitchiner

UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins Annual Subscription £3-00; 11.11. 12-00; 5-00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 51 October 1977 Members News

It is with regret that we report the death of Mr. H. G. Preece of Staines in the spring. Mr. Preece had been a

member of the ONS since its inception and was particularly knowledgeable regarding Chinese coins. Raymond

- Hebert of 6305 Windermere Circle, Rockville MD 20852, writes: "1 would be grateful for any information

on SALGHURID coins: casts or photos with indications, to include in my Corpus. I would also be grateful for references in lesser known sources." William L.S. Barrett of Box 1747, Station B, Montreal P.Q., Canada, writes "I am currently working on a series of in-depth articles on early British colonial banks and notes and

need notes and information on: India 1780-1862, Ceylon 1840-1885, Straits Settlements 1840-1902, China (Foreign Banks) 1850-1930, Japan (Foreign Banks) 1860-1885, Persia (Imperial Bank) 1890-1930, Hong Kong 1840-1930, Siam 1889-1902. All correspondence welcome." Dr. P.A. Eckstein of Cambridge has a number of books on Ottoman coins which he is willing to lend to interested members on payment of the

appropriate postage. They are Catalogue of Islamic coins vol 2 (Istanbul 1974) by I. and C. Artuk and a group of books by C. Olcer: Ottoman coins of Sultan Mahmud II (1970), Rare Ottoman coins at Soviet Russian

Museums (1972), The silver coinage of the last six Ottoman rulers (1966), Omamental copper coinage of the Ottoman Empire (1975) and Bayezid and his son, their silver and copper coins (1968): all are written in Turkish but some have an English insert. A forthcoming ONS meeting in London.

Following some indications of support it is proposed to hold a meeting at St. James' Hall, Gloucester Terrace, London W. 2 on Saturday 19 th. November commencing about 2 pm. It is hoped that as many members as

possible will attend. The meeting will be quite informal and is to enable members to chat, exchange information, swop or exhibit coins etc. Some tea will probably be arranged. The hall is round the corner from

Lancaster Gate underground station (on the Central Line), a short distance from the West End. For other

details and any queries please contact Mr. Ken Wiggins. Further forgeries.

Mr. N. G. Rhodes draws attention to forgeries of the Tibetan 7% Skar dated 15-43 (1909: - 11). The forgeries can be distinguished by one word under the lion which is written ' BX ' instead of 'BF " on the

genuine coins. Apart from this the coins are of good workmanship and could easily deceive. He also mentions

the recent appearance of false coins of Tripura. Some are clearly false, such as the % rupees of Ratna Manikya dated 1603 and of Kalyana Manikya dated 1548 and undated 1/8 th. rupees of Govinda Manikya, as the style

is very crude; but other pieces have been appearing in very good style and are not easily detected.

American Numismatic Association Convention in Altanta.

A number of ONS members from both North America and Europe attended this convention recently. Among

them Grover C. Criswell was elected President of the Association; a position in which he succeeds Virgil

Hancock, who remains a Director. Chester L. Krause received the Farran Zerbe Award and Arthur Braddon Coole was presented with the 101 st. ANA Medal of Merit.

Numismatic Society of India: 65 th. Annual Conference.

The conference will be held at Shillong later in 1977 under the auspices of the Dept. of History, North-eastern Hill University, Shillong 793001, Meghalaya. Further details are available from Dr. Nisar Ahmad, Assistant Secretary to the Numismatic Society of India, P. O. Hindu University, Varanasi - 5, U. P., India. --- Recent Publications Papers

Richard K. Bright, Jhabua again, N.I. Bull., June 1977, 179 - 192

(Numismatics International, P.O. Box 30013, Dallas, Texas 75230)

- K. Bhatt, A unique silver coin of Qadir Shah of Malwa, Coin Review, Apr. - July 1976, 1

(Coin Review of the Numismatic Society of India, Banares Hindu University, Varanasi - 5, U. P.) - K. Bhatt, Two coin dies from the scrap, Coin review, Apr. - July 1976, 9 - S. DeShazo, An Arab Governor identified, SNC. July - Aug., 1977, 302 - 303  © (Hafs ibn "Umar ibn Tarka of Zaranj: AH 183 - 185) (Spink's Numismatic Circular, 5 - 7 King Street, St. James', London S.W.1) - S. DeShazo, An 'Abbasid miscellany, SNC. Sept. 1977, 361 - L. Johri, A unique double Hanuman tankah, Coin Review, Apr. - July 1976, 8

Thomas W. Keener, Common Chinese coins - in 1400 AD, N. I. Bull., Sept. 1977, 278 - 282 King On Mao, Treasure notes of China, IBNS Journal XVI no. 2, 86 - 98 - Lingen, Chandori rupee and its imitation, Coin Review, Apr. - July 1976, 10

Kenneth M. Mackenzie, Unpublished 5 paras of the Khalifa "Abdullah, SNC., July - Aug. 1977, 310

- H. Major, India: states, mints etc........ revisited, N. I. Bull., Aug. 1977, 254 - 262

- N. Mukherjee, Coins of Harikela, Coin Review, Apr. - July 1976, 2 - F. Nader and B. Kessell,  Updating the JIM series, Burma and Oceania, IBNS. Journal XVI no. 2, 71 - 76 Richard Plant, The coins of Hindu Kashmir, Seaby's Bull., Aug. 1977, 278 - 282

(Seaby's Coin and Medal Bulletin, 11 Margaret Street, London W. 1) Richard Plant, The Sabaean script on the coins of South Arabia, Seaby's Bull., Oct. 1977, 350 - 352 Richard Plant, The Ayyubid silver square type coins, Numismatics in Israel no. 5, July 1977, 51 - 53

(Ed. Yosef Sa'ar, Ta Doar 533, 88 100 Elat, Israel) - K. Sethi, Two silver medals from Kolhapur, Coin Review, Apr. - July 1976, 7  - K. Sethi, S. K. Bhatt and R. Holkar, A unique silver mudra of Tukoji Rao Holkar II, Coin review, ibid., 13 - M. Shastri, Coins of Satyabhadra, an unknown ruler of Vidarbha, Coin Review, ibid., 1 - Snartt, The rarity of East India Company coins: contd., Seaby's Bull., July 1977, 249 - Snartt, The rarity of East India Company coins: contd., Seaby's Bull., Aug. 1977, 282 - 285

- W. Wiggins, A gold mohur of the mint of Muminabad Bindraban, Coin Review, ibid., 4 Books

- B. Coole, State of Ming Knife coins and Minor Knives: vol. 6 in Encyclopaedia of Chinese Coins.

Quarterman Publications Inc., 5. So. Union Street, Lawrence, MA 01843. Pp. 512, 30-00 dollars.

- D. Cresswell,  Coins of Tibet, pp. 67. Six dollars. Numismatics International, P.O. Box 30013, Dallas, Texas 75230. Also available from Pat Hogan.

- M. Lowick, S. Bendall and P. D. Whitting, The Mardin Hoard: Islamic countermarks on Byzantine folles.

Pp. 80; 8 plates \<3 - 00 from A. H. Baldwin and sons, 11 Adelphi Terrace, London W.C.2 Michael Mitchiner, Oriental coins and their values: The World of Islam. Pp. 512 with over 8,000 photos,

Case bound. £ 25 - 00 from B. A. Seaby Ltd., 11 Margaret Street, London W 1. Due in November. - T. Newell, The Coinage of the Western Seleucid Mints from Seleucos I to Antiochus III. Pp. 464; 88 plates.

Reprint by the American Numismatic Society, Broadway at 155 th. Street, NY 10032, with summary of recent scolarship by Otto Morkholm. 35 - 00 dollars. - R. Slabaugh, Japanese Invasion Money; 5 th. edn. 1977. Pp. 40. Two dollars, from Pat Hogan. --- Book Catalogues

Scott Semans, a comprehensive book list (B 32) on Eastern Numismatics. Note his move to New Orleans c/o 1220 Pine Street, New Orleans, LA 70118 - J. Brill, of Leiden (Holland), with a subsidiary office at 41 Museum Street, London W. C. 1: extensive lists

of books on eastern subjects: Islamic, Indian, South-east Asian and Far Eastern. Review

A Study of Holkar State Coinage by Dr. P. K. Sethi, Dr. S. K. Bhatt and R. Holkar

Royal Octavo, hard back, 264 pages, 24 plates illustrating 363 coins and 211 symbols appearing on the coins appended with a map of the former Holkar State, generally better known as Indore State.

New books and monographs on the subject of Indian Native States do not appear frequently. The only real handbook on this subject is still ""Catalogue of coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, Vol. IV - Native States" which was written half a century ago. Although still valuable the Calcutta Catalogue only scrapes the surface of this complex and fascinating coin series. Since its appearance no attempt has been made to compile a one volume Corpus for this series and, indeed, with the large amount of material now available that would be virtually impossible. That is why the few recent publications and monographs have tended to restrict themselves to certain Native States, as is the case with the book under review.

In ''A Study of Holkar State coinage"' the authors are concerned with a particular branch of the Marathas,

ie. the Holkars, who, as Generals of the Maratha Peshwa (residing at Poona), took advantage of declining power of the Moghul Emperor (residing at Delhi) and in his name occupied large tracts of land in Malwa

and Central India. When the power and influence of the Peshwa also declined his Generals began acting more independantly and ultimately carved out States for themselves.

This book starts with a historical description of all the rulers from their beginnings and also notes the numismatic events transpiring during their reigns. The second chapter is concerned with mints and minting. The third chapter describes the dates and regnal years found on coins, as well as the eras used thereon. A chapter describing the coin legends preceeds the Catalogue in which no less than 671 coins are listed and described. Of these, 363 coins are illustrated on 21 plates. Except for the supplementary plate, which is poor, all other illustrations range from good to very good.

Next to the Catalogue of coins is a chapter containing "'Notes and references of the Circulars relating to

the coinage of the Holkars". The full text of the references is given in Nagari and a summary of each is provided in English. The balance of the book comprises a number of tables. For example - Income of the Holkar State - Mint records of Malharnagar - Income and Expenditure of the Mint - Statement showing the

rate of Taccas (copper coins) - etc. In addition a Map of the former Holkar State has been added as well as two plates showing the various symbols appearing on coins.

As may appear from the description of its contents this book is not merely a Catalogue of all the known coins, dates, types etc., but it also gives, so far as is possible, a correlation between numismatics and the political, social and economic conditions in the State. The value of the book is futher enhanced by the use of

much original and previously un-published information and a unique feature are the "modi"? records which have been reproduced from the originals.

There are also shortcomings. One thing I miss most is that no attempt has been made to catalogue coins struck at irregular and country mints which functioned during the early years of this State's existance: mints like those of Chandor, Sironj and Wabgaon. All the coins described and illustrated come from either Malharnagar (Indore) or Maheshwar, which were the regular mints of the State. One plate is devoted to coin

dies, but in my opinion the authors have not been critical enough in distinguishing original coin dies from the

possibly contemporary dies used by forgers and sarafs (goldsmiths). To judge from the photographs, at most 6 out of 13 are original dies (viz. nos. 332, 335, 336, 337, 338 and 340).

However, the few shortcomings do not in any respect reduce the value of this work. Taking into account

the tremendous amount of information and also the large number of coins on which this study has been based this book will be, for a long time to come, the most complete and comprehensive Corpus of the Coins of Indore State. The book should be of much interest to any collector of this series and will also be useful to

those interested in the political, social and especially economic background. It is the first study of its kind dealing with the Indian Native States.

The Price is 100 Rupees or 15 US dollars. The book can be obtained directly from Dr. S. K. Bhatt at

15 Kailash Park, Manoramaganj, Indore 452001, India. Reviewed by Jan Lingen. --- Ottoman Zinc Coins? by Hans Wilski

A few years ago I bought a 2 Kharubs coin at the famous camel market of Nabeul in Tunisia. It was minted in the names of the Ottoman Sultan Abd ul Aziz (1227 - 1293 AH) and the Tunisian Bey Mohammed al

Sadik (1276 - 1299 AH) in the year 1289 AH at Tunisia. Copper coins of this type are well known and are described, for instance, by Nuri Pere (no. 957)'. Surprisingly, the coin found at Nabeul is made of Zinc. The weight of the coin is only 9.94 grams, in comparison with the regular copper issues which weigh about

12 grams. The coin must have been in circulation for a long time, since the condition is only "'fine to very fine"'.

Recently I acquired a 10 guerche piece of Egypt of the Ottoman Sultan Abd ul Hamid (1293 - 1327 AH). The coin shows the regnal year 17 and the mint mark '"'W''. Silver coins of this type are by no means rare, they are described by Nuri Pere (no. 990). The coin recently found is made from zinc and bears traces of silver plating on both sides. It weighs only 10.17 grams. This is significantly lower than the weight of corresponding silver coins which weigh 14.0 grams. Though these coins bear the usual inscription (in Arabic) "minted at Cairo", they were, in fact, minted in Berlin (Germany). The condition of the coin found is "very fine", again showing that it was in circulation for a long time.

In 1971 Lutz Ilisch described a para of Mahmud II (1223 - 1255 AH) of Tripolis which was made from zinc, instead of copper or brass?.

All the coins described are without doubt struck specimens. They are not primitively cast fakes. It is difficult to understand how these coins could circulate, and for a considerable time, since all are easily distinguished from the corresponding regular issues. Any further information about these zinc coins would be greatly appreciated.

Nuri Pere: Osmanlilarda Madeni Paralar, Istanbul 1968.

Lutz Ilisch: Munstersche Numismatische Zeitung 44 (Dezember 1971), 15.

The Obverse of the Sri-Sata coin by Robert Tye Illustrated below is the obverse of a coin belonging to the issue ascribed by Rapson' to the Satavahana King Satakarni in his 'Coins of the Andhra Dynasty'. The design shows a well built, possibly female, deity standing facing, surrounded by two Caitya of three arches, the "Ujjain" symbol with attached crescent and a tree-in-railing. The head of the deity is somewhat indistinct and appears to bear side ornaments. On the reverse are the two symbols shown by Rapson; an Elephant and a River, together with the inscription " Rajio Siri Satasa ''.

The only other Andhra coin showing a similar deity is BMC Plate 1, no. 2; a coin bearing the same inscription but with a cruder figure showing no sign of being female. However, similar archaic figures are to be

found further north on coins of the 2nd and 151. centuries BC, such as issues struck in Paficala and Mathura, and the influence of this hieratic stance can be seen in many pieces of late Indian statuary. Dr. V. V. Mirashi? has queried Rapson's identification and suggested that the coins were struck by Sati; Satakarni's second son.

- J.  Rapson, Catalogue of the coins of the Andhra Dynasty, the Western Kshatrapas etc., 1908, no. 1 - V. Mirashi, Studies in Indology III, Nagpur University, 1962.

NO سم‎