# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries My. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. A. Gorter Dr. M. B. Mitchiner UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins

Annual subscription: £ 2-00; H. Fl. 12-00; 5-00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 45 October 1976

Members news. Mr. Henderson (416) of Washington has added Oriental Paper Money to his interests. Mme Negre (553) of Paris has extended her interests to Central Asia, the Seljugs and the Mamlukes and is knowledgeable regarding late Abbasid coinage. Mr. Barraclough of Bristol has modified his interest to include only coins of the East India Company: he also has two books for sale, Studies in Indian Coins by D. C. Sircar and Copper coins of

India, parts I and II by Valentine. Mr. James Silver (5) of Beersheva has Islamic and Indian coins for sale and © can also obtain numismatic books at a discount. We are sorry to report the death of Mr. R. L. Sweeny (463) of South Carolina.

ONS Meeting. Mr. Nicholas Rhodes (10) is holding a meeting at his house in Kingston on Satruday 13 th November from 2 pm. (Telephone 01 - 546 - 3352). Any member is welcome to attend. Please contact Mr. Rhodes for details.

Numismatic Society of India. The 64 th. Annual Conference will be held at Ludhiana in November 1976 and will include a seminar on

'Coins from the Punjab'. Annual subscription to the Society is 20 rupees (£ 3 or 7 dollars). Details from Dr. Nisar Ahmad (Secretary), Numismatic Society of India, P. O. Hindu University, Varanasi - 5, UP, India. Information sheets.

IS no. 14 on the Queen Victoria rupees of Bhartpur by K. Wiggins is currently being distributed. In November we shall be issuing the second paper by Dr. Tarizzo on North Africa; this will deal with the coins of the Aghlabids. Nicholas Rhodes' paper on Bhutan is not yet available but should be ready early in the New Year. Note from the Secretary General.

Due to recent changes in exchange rates it has become necessary to amend some rates of subscription. From \| st. January 1977 subscription rates will be: General Section: Initial subscription: 7 US dollars Renewal: 5 dollars © Europe: - Fl 18 - 00  - Fl. 12-00 UK and Eire £4-00 £ 3-00 - America  7 US dollars 5 dollars Please note that these are minimum subscriptions and that they may be paid in any convertible currency provided an addition is made to cover all bank charges. We are most grateful to those members who add a donation when renewing their subscriptions as extra income means that we can undertake more papers and meetings for members. In some countries such donations count for tax relief and a certificate can be issued for this purpose if necessary. Cochin, South India. - W. Wiggins

AE. Diameter 12 mm.; weight 2.915 gm. (45 grains). Scholten in "The coins of the Dutch Overseas Territories" (Schulman, Amsterdam 1953) lists under Cochin a copper Rasi (no. 1252) and a Half Rasi(no. 1253). The Rasi is illustrated. A recent addition to this series is the Quarter Rasi illustrated here. Scholten gives the weight of the Rasi as between 10.840 and 11.794 grams. My specimens weigh: Rasi 11.788 gm (181 grains); % Rasi 5.832 gm (90 grains). It is doubtful if the largest coin was in fact known as a Rasi. This denomination was an old, very small, Hindu gold coin weighing about 6 grains. It was superceded by the gold fanam. Scholten quotes Rademacher (Verhandlingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Watenschappen. IVe dl. Rotterdam 1786) as calling it '""Rasi copper from Muscat'' but qualifies this in a footnote by saying that Rademacher probably means that he obtained the coin from Muscat.

The denomination of this copper series therefore seems quite uncertain but it is possible that the coins were the equivalent of One, Half and Quarter Stivers and used locally by the Dutch in Cochin and on the Malabar coast. --- Recent Publications.

Middle East. - A. Athanassoulos, Greek Counterstamps on Ottoman Coins, N. I. Bulletin X, 8, Aug. 1976, 270-8.

- S. Barron, An unpublished Mahdist coin as an indicator of the Great Debasement of the coinage in the Mahdist State,

Spink's NC. Oct 1976, 368-9. - Berman, The turbulent events in Syria in 658 - 659 H/ 1260 AD reflected by three hitherto unpublished dirhams, Spink's NC. Sept. 1976, 314-6.

- G. Hulse,ل‎  The coinage of Modern Ethiopia, N. I. Bulletin, June 1976, 179 - 215. - Lachman, An early Egyptian Umayyad Fals, Spink's NC. July/Aug. 1976, 274. - E. Lenker, Gold pieces of Menelik II, Calcoin News 30.3, Summer 1976, 74-7. - Munzel, Ein Dinar des Ichschiditen Kafur aus dem Jahre 356 AH, Jahrbuch fur Numismatik und Geldgeschichte XXV, 1975,

129 - 134. - G. Rhodes, Some Armenian notes, Spink's NC. Oct. 1976, 370-1. - Wilski, review of S. Lachman and K. MacKenzie, Countermarks of the Ottoman Empire, in Geldgeschichtliche Nachrichten

II no. 54, July 1976 (reprints from Dr. Wilski).
India - K. Bhatt, A rare One Eighth silver tankah of Jahangir, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976

- K. Bhatt, An unknown copper coin of Qadir Shah, Governor of Malwa, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976, 5 - K. Bhatt, P. K. Sethi and R. Holkar, A coin die of Tukoji Rao II Holkar 1269 AH, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976, 4. - K. Bright, An unrecorded Jodhpur Mohur, N. I. Bulletin X, 8, Aug. 1976, 278. P.L. Gupta, Rupee of Edward VII dated 1907, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 13.

- L. Johri, A rare One Sixteenth silver tankah of Shahjahan, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976. - van Laere, Larins of Sultan Ali Adil Shah, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976, 14. - Lingen, Chandori rupee and its imitations, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976, 7. - B. Mitchiner, Two overstruck coins linking Hermaeus, Gondophares and Kujula Kadphises, Seaby's Coin and Medal Bull.,

Aug. 1976, 307 - 8. - K. Sethi, S. K. Bhatt and R. Holkar, Tukoji Rao II Holkar, his last silver coins, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976, 11. - M. Shastri, Silver coin of Chandella Devavarman, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976.

- Snartt, Some unpublished varieties if E. 1. C. Madras coins, Spink's NC. Sept. 1976, 319. - Snartt, The rarity of East India Company coins (contd.), Seaby's Coin and Medal Bull., Sept. 1976, 347 -9. - W. Wiggins, Silver coins used in Dewas State, Coin review, Varanasi, II, 1976, 6. Further East

- Banning, Chinese Medallions in Ancient Mexico, T'ung Pao 2.1, 1976, 19.

Vic. Brown, A British forgery of Japanese Malay Invasion currency, Bank Note Reporter, June 1976.

Vic. Brown, Japanese POW. camp canteen currency used on the "Death Railway", Bank Note Reporter, July 1976.

- L. Cummings, Japanumisology: coin designs that didn't succeed, T'ung Pao 2.1, 1976, 16-18. - Fox, The Fox research project on the coinage of French Cochin and Indo-China, T'ung Pao 2.1, 1976, 20-25. - Wicks, review of O. D. Cresswell, Early coinage of south-east Asia in Journal of the Siam Society, vol 63 part 2, July 1975,

440 - 445. - Wright, The Hunan copper mints in 1906, T'ung Pao 2.1, 1976, 2-3. Books

- Berger, Ch'ing cash until 1935, Hong Kong, price 15 dollars - B. Mitchiner, Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian coinage, Volumes 5 (Establishment of the Scythians in Afghanistan and

Pakistan) and 6 (The dynasty of Azes) are now available (Seaby, London). Volumes 2 and 3 were reviewed in N. I. Bulletin for Aug. 1976. Guy le Strange, Lands of the Eastern Caliphate, reprints available from Kegan Paul, 39 Store Street, London WC1 (£9 - 50). - 8. and M. White, A comprehensive finding list of Chinese cash, T'ang to Republic (5 dollars from the authors in Sheldonville

# MA).

Publications on Oriental Numismatics cited in Numismatic Literature, 95.

Islamic, Sassanian. Artimon, A., Un tezaur monetar din secolele XVII-XVIII descoperit la Cleja (jud. Bacau), (A coin hoard of the 17-18 th.

centuries discovered at Cleja, Bacau country), Carpica 6, 19734, 101-6 (illus. Fr. summary: 54 Ottoman coins). Al-Bakri, Mahab Darwish, Nuqud al-Dawlah al-Jala'iriyya al-Mahfuza fi al-Mathaf al-'Iraqi (Coins of the Jalairids in the Iraqi

Museum), Sumer 29, 1973, 229 - 244 (illus.) Brunner, Christopher J., Middle Persian inscriptions on Sassanian silverware, Metropolitan Museum Journal 9, 1974, 109-121

(illus: a collection of all known insc. on Sassanian silver bowls and objects, transl. and discussed; providing evidence for metrology of the Sassanian drachm and Arab-Sassanian dirhem). Al-Husayni, Muhammad Baqir, Al-Kuna wa'l-alqab 'ala nuqud dawlatay al-Murabitin wa'l-Muwahhidin fi shamal Ifriquiya wa'l-

Andalus (Agnomens and titles on the coins of the Murabitin and Muwahhidin dynasties of North Africa and Spain),

Sumer 30, 1974, 223-272. Kmietowicz, Anna, Monety arabskie i ich napyw do Polski wczesnosredniowiecznej (Arabic coins and their circulation in early

medieval Poland), Biblioteczka BN Warsaw, Polskie Towarzystwo Arch i Num, Komisja Numizmatyczna 1971, pp 23 (illus.) Kmietowicz, Anna, Nieznany skarb dirhemow arabskich z X w. z terenu Bialorusi (A hitherto unknown hoard of 10 th. century

Arab dirhems from Belorussia) Wiad. Num. 18 no. 1 1974, 30-46 (Illus: English summary: 63 dirhems, two Abbasid

and 63 Samanid of AH 894-948). Kromann, Anne, Persisk guld i svaervaegtsklassen (Heavy Persian gold coins), Montsamlernyt 6.1, 1975, xvi-xvii (illus.) Mercil, Erdogan, Fars meliki selcuk sah'in hayati ve paralari (The life and coinage of Seljuq Shah, ruler of Fars), Tarih Enstitusu

Dergisi, nos 4-5, 1974, 23-35 (illus.). Nylen, Erik, Stavers skatt (The Staver hoard), Skand Numis, 4.6, Aug. 1975, 12 (c.1,000 Islamic coins from Gotland).

Raymond, Andre, Artisans et commercants au Caire au XVIIlIe siecle, 2 vols. Damascus, Institut Francais de Damas 19734, 920 pp. (illus.: Ch. 1 pp.17-52. deals with coins current in 18 th. century Egypt, both local and foreign). Robin, Gabriel, L'ordre de Saint-Jean de Jerusalem dit de Rhodes ou de Malte, Cahiers Num. 11 no. 40 June 1974, 40-44.
Roussel, Michel, Les themes decoratifs sur les monnaies musulmanes au Moyen Age, Archeonumis no. 13, March 1975, 23-26. AL-Salihi, Wathiq Ismail, al-Hadar: al-Nuqud al-Muktashafa khilala tangibat 1971-2 (Hatra: coins discovered in the excavations

of 1971-2), Sumer 30, 1094, 155-162 (2 hoards Hellenistic to Sassanian periods).

Salman, 'Isa, Coins presented to the Gulbenkian Museum, Sumer 29, 1973, 101-110 (illus.: numerous dynasties represented).

Shamma, Samir, The coinage of the Tulunids in Filistin, Al-Abhath 24, 1971, 43-49 (illus.).

Tozen, Ibrahim, Arab-Sasani paralari (Arab-Sassanian coins), Yapi ve Kredi Bankasi Numismatik Yayinlari no. 7, Istanbul 1975, 25 pp. (Illus.; English summary)

Wever, Ernst-Gunther, Die arabisch-sasanidischen Munzen Kirmans aus dem jahre AH 77 (AD 696), Munster Num. Zeit. 65-66, Nov. 1975, 10-12 (illus.)

# tnasaV dna,yaR,lamiraP nioC sepyt fo eht sgnik fo,rahcaK lanruoJ fo tneicnA naidnI yrotsiH,5,2-1791.‏11-402 11ب

Gray, John C. F. and Westergaard, J., J. Brix Seneste Trankebar nyhed (A newly found coin of Tranquebar) NNUM 9, Nov. 1975, 1184-5 (illus).

Jensen, Jorgen Steen, Guldpagoden fra Trankebar (The 1789 Tranquebar pagoda), Montsamlernyt 6.1, 1975, xxv (illus). Sadeque, Abdus, Indian and Pakistan currency, Dacca Star Press, 1965, pp. 398

Sircar, D. C., Silver coins of Ratnamanikya and Dhanyamanikya of Tripura, Journal of Ancient Indian History 5, 1971-2, 27-37. Far East

Gusiew, Jerzy, Pieniadze Mongolii (money of Mongolia), Lodzki Num. vols 12-13 nos. 111-1 16, 19734, 66-71 (illus).

Ogawa, Hiroshi, Tenposen Zufu (Illus. record of Tenpo Tsuho coins), Tokyo, Nippon, Kosen Kenkyukai 1975, pp. 119. © 5, Barron IRANIAN NUMISMATICS contd.

# Sayyid Jamal TORABI TABATA', رسم الخط ايغورى وسسيرى در ىسانشةس‎

(The Uighur script and other Numismatic notes), Tabriz, Azerbaijan Museum publication no. 6, 1351 AHS.

pp. 11 + 101; illustrations in text: card covers. Price 150 rials.

The first 14 pages of this work help the collector of Mongol coins to decipher the Uighur script which is found on many of the

coins. Both the "printed" form and the form actually found on coins are represented. However, not all inscriptions are found in

this book. The second part of the book consists mainly of corrections to other works published in Iran, hence the rather unusual ) سيرى‎ literally means completeness). The different parts of the book are as follows:-

The Uighur script as found on coins 3-14 Corrections to the article "Coins showing

Corrections and additions to "Coins of the nationalism & freedom" in Hunar va Mardom,

Islamic Shahs of Iran" 15-1 92 & 104, by Abu-l-Fath Qahramani & Shams

Corrections to "History of the Jalayrids 82-84 ad-Din Jazayeri 89 - 93

| Corrections to "Coins of the Parthian Rulers | Corrections to the article "Coins of Nader Shah |
|:--- |:--- |
| 85 - 88 | Afshar" by Abd al-Khalig Mohabbat-Ayin with |
| Muhammad Mushiri in Bar Rasiha-ye Tarikhi, | 6,1, |

85 - 88 Afshar" by Abd al-Khalig Mohabbat-Ayin with

Muhammad Mushiri in Bar Rasiha-ye Tarikhi, 6,1,

# اهكسى شاه اسمعيل اول dammahuM,‏IRIHSUM

(Coins of Shah Isma'il I), Tehran, Gotenborg Publications, 1351 AHS. pp. 32; illustrated. Card covers. Price 20 rials. This is the first booklet of a series on the gold coins of Iran. It consists of a history of the life of Shah Isma'il I, a list of mints

and illustrations, which are generally poor. There is a short bibliography at the end. Thirteen coins and one seal are illustrated.

# Muhammad MUSHIRI, سكفهاى

دمحماقآ خان راجاق شرديو محمد حسن خان راجاق‎ (Coins of Agha Muhammad Khan Qajar and his father Muhammad Hasan Khan Qajar), Tehran, Gotenborg Publications,

1351 AHS. pp. 32; illustrated. Card covers. Price 20 rials.

This is the second in the series of booklets on the gold coins of Iran. Four coins of Muhammad Hasan Khan are illustrated.

There are 36 coins of Muhammad Khan. The booklet has no bibliography.

Muhammad MUSHIRI, سة‎ cer) pS glai-al, (Guide to coin collecting), 2 vols., Tehran, Gotenborg Publications, 1351 AHS. pp. 32 each volume; illustrated. Card

covers. Price 20 rials each. These two booklets are essentially a beginner's guide to coin collecting and are therefore only useful to Iranian readers. However,

the second volume has a useful 16 page bibliography of numismatic works in Persian which are not mentioned elsewhere.