# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. G. 2. Hennequin

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel Dr. M. B. Mitchiner

UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins Annual Subscription £5-00; 21.11. 25-00; FF. 65-00; 9-00 dollars North America: Dr. Craig Burns Newsletters numbers 85 - 86 August - October 1983 Members news

Would UK members please note that the address of their Regional Secretary is now (Mr. K. Wiggins).

Membership subscriptions, except for North America, are now changed (as of Ist. Sept) to reflect current

exchange rates. The new rates are cited above. Mr.... (674) has a number of copies of 'Siamese coins and tokens' by Le May, Ramsden, Guehler and Kneedler (1977 reprint) available. Please contact him for details. Mr.... (4) has a number of duplicate and unwanted coins for disposal. A list will be sent on request. Members may like to know that the final part of the Pridmore collection of Indian coins (The

uniform coinage of India, 1835 - 1947) will be auctioned by Glendining & Co. on Monday, 17th. October

1983 (Catalogues available from the auctioneers or A. H. Baldwin and Sons). The next ONS publication will

be an Occasional Paper on Chinese Coin Inscriptions. The Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies, which was due to open this autumn, is now scheduled to open on 8th. January 1984. There will then be a seminar on the 9th, 10th and perhaps the 11th January. Please contact Mr.... for further details,.

ONS meetings The next ONS meeting in London will be at 2 - 30 pm on Saturday Sth. November at 28 Little Russell St.,

London W 1. Members may like to know that on the same day there is also a coin fair at the Cumberland Hotel, Marble Arch.

The Northeastern USA Chapter on the ONS will hold its second meeting on Saturday December 10th. at

6 - 00 pm during the Twelfth Annual New York International Numismatic Convention at the Sheraton Ceater,

Seventh Avenue, between 52nd and 5310 Streets, New York City. The speaker will be Dr. Marie H. Martin (Associate editor of the ANS) who will talk on the 'Coinage and monetary system of the Mughal ruler Akbar'.

Please contact the secretary, Willam B. Warden jr., PO Box...., for details. Two new Gupta gold staters by K. C. Jaria Chandragupta II Archer type

The reverse shows Kamal instead of a Lotus; and the Goddess

has her leg downward, which is not seen on other Gupta coins of the Archer type Kumaragupta I Archer type

The Goddess is seated facing on a lotus (as usual); but her leg is

downward (1 - leg) which, as just noted, is not recorded on other Archer type coins. --- Some recent publications

Agrawal, A., The place of Kacha in Gupta chronology, JNSI 1981 i, 71 - 74

Bailey, H. W., The dating of the Kamra kharosthi inscription, Afghan Studies (London), 3 - 4, 1982, 81 Bajpai, K. D., Numismatic evidence on the extension of Satavahana rule in Central India, JNSI 1981 i, 63 - 66 Bajpai, K. D., A note on the Sunga - Mitra rulers, JNSI 1981 ii, 95 - Bajpai, K. D., A new Boddo type gold coin of Kanishka, JNSI 1982, 42 - 45 Bajpai, S. K., Pagara hoard of Gupta gold coins, JNSI 1982, 52-55 Bivar, A. D. H., Bent bars and straight bars: an appendix to the Mir Zakah hoard, Studia Iranica 11, 1982, 49

Chatterjee, B., Meaning of the symbols on early Indian coinage, JNSI 1981 i, 60 - 62 and JNSI 1981 ii, 92 - 94 Chatterjee, B., Earliest gold coin in the Gangetic delta, JNSI 1982, 144 - 147 Cripe, M. L., Immobilisation and change in 19th century Baroda Coinage, NI Bull. Aug. 1983, 271 - 274 De, G., A Chandragupta-Kumaradevi coin from Chandraketugarh, JNSI 1981 ii, 46 - 48

De, G., Five silver coins of two independant Bengal Sultans, JNSI 1982, 56 - 58 Demarais, J., French Indochina - some observations on its currency, NI Bull. Aug. 1983, 261 - 266 Dobbins, K. W., Wilson's Ariana Antiqua: the discovery of Ancient Afghanistan, JNSI 1982, 139 - 143 Farid, G. S., Three coins of Sultan Qutbuddin Mahmud Shah of Bengal, JNSI 1982, 62 - 65

Gabrisch, K., The Szechuan rupee and its variants, NI Bull. Apr. 1983, 103 - 112 Ganguly, D. K., The Ramagupta problem, JNSI 1981 ii, 97 - 113 Ganguly, D. K., Medieval Orissan coins as a source of history, JNSI 1982, 114 - 129 Ghosh, K., A gold Rama-tanka of South Indian origin: a re-appraisal, JNSI 1982, 79 - 81 Gokhale, S., New discoveries in the Satavahana coinage, JNSI 1981 i, 54-59

Gupta, M. L., A note on the Nepal coin of Sultan Alaud-dunya-va-din Khalji, JNSI 1981 ii, 80 Gyselen, R., Untrésoriranien de monnaies Sasanides (v\* - vi® siécles), Revue Numismatique 23, 1981, 133-41 Gyselen, R., Trois poids monétaires Arabo-Pehlevis, Studia Iranica 11, 1982, 163 - 166

Gyselen, R., A propos d'un toponyme Sasanide, Journal Asiatique 270, 1982, 271 - 272 Gyselen, R., Chroniques et études bibliographiques: 4 propos de numismatique iranienne, ibid. 415 - 426

Handa, D., A note on re-struck and re-used Kushan and Yaudheya coins, JNSI 1982, 46 - 47 Handa, D., Three new Rama-tankas, JNSI 1982, 77 - 8

Handa, D., A bronze seal from Palla, JNSI 1982, 96 Hebert, R. J., An Eretnaid 'hoard', NI Bull. Feb. 1983, 47 - 54 Hennequin, G., Monnaies islamiques inédites ou peu courantes, Bull. de la Soc. Franc. de Num., Apr. 1983 Hennequin, G., Catalogue des monnais orientales, Marseilles 1983 llisch, L., Anmerkungen zu einem katalog orientalischer munzen in Marseille, Munstersche NZ, Apr. 1983,10- 12
Ilisch, L., Stempelveranderungen an Islamischermunzen des mittelalters als quelle zur munzstattenorganisation,

Proc. 9th International Congress of Numismatics, Luxembourg 1982 Jain, K. U., Rare silver coins of the Kalachuris, JNSI 1981 ii, 70 - 71 Jain, R., Chandela coins from Tewar, JNSI 1981 ii, 75 - 76 Jalagania, I. L., Inosemnaya moneta v deneshnom obrashchenii grysii V - XIII vv: The monetary circulation

of foreign coins in Georgia, Tiflis 1979 (from Armenian Coins and Books, California). Jash, P., Religion as reflected on the post-Gupta coins from Bengal, JNSI 1981 i, 75 - 80 Jash, P., The cult of Sri Lakshmi in Eastern India as reflected on the coins, JNSI 1981 ii, 114 - 120 Jeyaraj, V., Non-destructive analysis of South Indian panams, JNSI 1981 ii, 132 - 133

Katare, S. L., A note on the Bhagila coins, JNSI 1982, 29 - 36 von Kleist, Ch-E., Zwei neue munzen der Malla-Herrscher von Kathmandu in Nepal, Munstersche NZ July

1983, 17 Kulkanni, P. P., A note on copper coins of Shamsuddin Kaiumars, JNSI 1982, 60 - 61 Kunda, P., Indian deities on Bactrian and Indo-Greek coins, JNSI 1982, 130 - 135 Lahiri, B., The Gupta-type coins of the early medieval period, JNSI 1982, 155 - 170 Lariviere, R. W., Coins in the Naradasmriti's chapter on theft, JNSI 1982, 108 - 113 Lowick, N. M., Further unpublished Islamic coins of the Persian Gulf, Studia Iranica, 11, 1982 Mandel, E. J., A Chinese 'mirror' made in Viet Nam, NI Bull. Aug. 1983, 281 - 282 Mangalam, S. J., Sibi coins in the Deccan College Archaeological Museum, JNSI 1982, 24 - 28 Mani, B. R., On an imitation Gupta gold coin from Sundarban, JNSI 1981 ii, 60 - 62 Mani, 8. R., New evidence concerning gold prototype silver coins of the Gupta emperors, JNSI 1981 ii, 54 - 9 Mani, B. R., Some seals, sealings and stamps in my colleciton, JNSI 1982, 86 - 90 Masumi, A. M. K., A fresh note on the recently discovered silver coins of Sultan Hussain Shah of Bengal, JNSI 1981 ii, 82 - 85 Mitchiner, M., The date of the early Funanese, Mon, Pyu and Arakanese coinages ('symbolic coins'), Journal

of the Siam Society (Bangkok), 70i- ii, 1982,5-12 Morwanchikar, R. S., The portrait coins of the Satavahana kings, JNSI 1981 i, 46 - 53

Mukherjee, B. N., Gold coins from Tillya-teppe (Afghanistan), JNSI 1981 i, 41 - 45 Mukherjee, B. N., A plea for the study of art in coinage, JNSI 1981 ii, 1 - 37 Mukhopadhyay, C., Goddess Ganga on Gupta coins, JNSI 1982, 148 - 150 Murthy, A. V. N., Gods and Goddesses on the coins of Karnataka, JNSI 1982, 171 - 179

Naseem, M., Compartmented seals from the Quetta valley (Baluchistan), JNSI 1981 ii, 127 - 135

Nema, S. R., A new hoard of gold coins of Gangeyadeva, JNSI 1981 ii, 72 - 74 Nercessian, Y. T., Attribution and dating of Armenian bilingual trams, Armenian Numismatic Soc. (8511 Beverly Park Place, Pico Rivera, Ca 90660: Special publ. no. 2, 1983: pp. 36, pl. 12: 7 dollars)

Nigam, L. S., An unique repousse gold coin of Prasannamatra, JNSI 1981 ii, 49 - 53

O'Meara, P., Bronze coins issues as non-token coinage, NI Bull. June 1983, 199 - 201

Pathak, V. S., Semantic study of numismatic terms, JNSI 1981 i, 1-18

Pathak, V. S., Ahata: a semantic study, JNSI 1982, 97 - 107

Phukan, J. N., Re-attribution of the coins of Suhung, JNSI 1982, 66 - 70 Plant, R., The Garuda, Seaby's C&M Bull. Aug. 1983, 203

Prakash, J., On the dates on Indian religious tokens, NI Bull. July 1983, 235 - 238 Rao, V. P. S., On arare silver tetradrachm of Vonones, JNSI 1982, 37 - 38 Rispling, G., Die-linked tenth-century Islamic imitations in Sweden, Seaby's C&M Bull. June 1983, 146 - 148 Robinson, M., The Government of India banknotes issued for Burma, Spink's NC. Apr. 1983, 79-80: May 116-7 Robinson, M., Bodawpaya's introduction of coinage into Burma, Spink's NC. July 1983, 185 - 187 Robinson, M. and Pollard, A. M., Analysis of Burmese coins by X-ray fluorescence, Spink's NC. Oct. 1983,

263 - 266 Rockwell, T. P., Dating systems on coins since 1000 AD - additions and corrections, NI Bull. May 1983, 136-151 Roy, B. P., Inscribed terracotta sealings from Vaisali, JNSI 1982, 91-95

Sankaranarayana, N., Recent treasure trove find of Vijayanagar coins from Kuttukurichi, JNSI 1981 ii, 86-90 Schimmel, J. F., Tokens around us: Egypt, NI Bull. July 1983, 244 Seaby, P. J., Ismailis and Fatimids, NI Bull. May 1983, 161 - 162

Sethi, R. K., The problem of Maharaja Sri Gupta, JNSI 1981 ii, 63 - 69 Sethi, R. K., The Sebakas, JNSI 1982, 151 - 154

# RB \_ًط Aمة\>سمعA مشٌل0صطصطعطلظلظلللظىظسىجىىلشل\|ا\|\[رط\[ط\[آ\[طظط\]ططكطك2ل2ع2-د5بلبببههه+بيعة\<-\<-لل\_"ل‎
Sharma, S., Uninscribed copper coins from Ahichhatra, JNSI 1982, 20 - 23 Shastri, A. M., Pre-Satavahana and Satavahana coinage of the Deccan, JNSI 1982, 1 - 16 Shukla, K. S., Two silver punchmarked coins from Sanchankot, JNSI 1982, 17 - 19 Siddiqui, - H., A copper coin of Hussain Nizam Shah I, JNSI 1981 ii, 81 Siddiqui, A. H., Two notable coins of Haider Ali and Tipu Sultan, JNSI 1981 ii, 86 - 90 Sidi, F. K., Madinat al Mahdiya, NI Bull. May 1983, 159 - 160 Singh, O. P., Ornaments as depicted on early Indian coins, JNSI 1981 ii, 121 - 126 Singh, O. P., A note on silver coin of Chandragupta I and Kumaradevi, JNSI 1982, 48 - 51

Singh, O. P., Unique gold coins of Vasudeva, JNSI 1982, 136 - 138 Singh, R. U., Some rare Indo-Greek silver coins, JNSI 1982, 39 - 41 Singh, S. P., Bhelavar hoard of silver punchmarked coins, JNSI 1981 i, 19 - 34 Singh, Y. B., Anote on the Rhinoceros type coin of Kumaragupta I, JNSI 1981 i, 67 - 70 Singh, Y. B., Copper coins and their minting in early medieval Kashmir, JNSI 1982, 180 - 184 Smirnova, 0. I., Svodnie katalog Sogdieskih monet, Moscow 1981 Smith, B. W., Shanghai taels, NI Bul\}., Feb. 1983, 54 Smith, B. W., China incident commemorative medal, NI Bull. Aug. 1983, 280

Tiwari, K. A., Inscribed punchmarked coins from Dasarna area, JNSI 1981 ii, 38 - 44 Tiwari, K. B., An inscribed punchmarked coin of Raja Bhanumitra, JNSI 1981 ii, 45 Tiwari, M. N. P., and Singh, C. D., Some observations on the so-called Jaina coins, JNSI 1961 i, 81 - 87 Tripathy, S., On new hoards of silver punchmarked coins from Orissa, JNSI 1981 i, 35 - 40

Westphal, H., Some silver coins from 12th century Adharbayjan, Munstersche NZ, July 1983, 15 - 16

Wicks, R. S., A survey of native Southeast Asian coinage circa 450 - 1850: documentation and typology, Thesis presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of Cornell University (PhD), May 1983

Yadava, A. L., Anew Rama tanka, JNSI 1981 ii, 91

The Coinage of the Mrohaung Dynasty of Arakan, 1430 - 1635 AD

Part 3: The Trilingual Coins by M. Robinson and N. G. Rhodes

The two previous articles have been concerned with the Arakanese coins bearing purely Arabic legends and the smaller series from Chittagong bearing Arakanese / Arabic and Arakanese / Bengali inscriptions. In this final paper we shall discuss the group of coins bearing legends in three scripts - Arakanese on one side; Arabic and Bengali on the other side. Some of these coins were described in Robinson and Shaw (1), but the work by San Tha Aung (2) has some more examples and, in certain cases, supplies more accurate readings of

the Arakanese. Much progress has also been made with reading the Bengali and Arabic legends. It is therefore appropriate to consider the whole group afresh.

Acknowledgements We should like to thank Mr. Graham Shaw (Assistant Keeper of North Indian Languages, Dept. of Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books, British Library) for his assistance with the Bengali legends and to Mr. Nicholas Lowick of the British Museum for his help with the Arabic legends. We are also grateful to the British Museum, the Ashmolean Museum, the American Numismatic Society and Dr. Domrow for permission to use their photographs. References

- Robinson and L. A. Shaw, The Coins and Banknotes of Burma, 0 U San Tha Aung, Arakanese Coins (in Burmese), Rangoon 1979 (English text available from M. Robinson)

- Karim, A Medieval Coin of Arakan, JNSI 1960, 225 - 228 - Schulman, Amsterdam, Auction Sale Catalogue, 30 March 1914, lot 1368 (illustrated)
The trilingual coins are all made of silver, they weigh around 10 grammes, and they were issued from at least 1593 to 1622. They bear on one side the king's name and titles and the date in Arakanese. It is translated into Arabic and Bengali on the other side, omitting only the date. In the listing below modern Burmese is used

and it should be noted that the Burmese numerals are sometimes different in form from the Arakanese. In

the Arabic inscriptions it is often clear that the definite article 'al - '' was intended, but the engraver either

did not have the knowledge, or else the space, to include it. Illustrations from reference (2) are enlarged, but by an unknown amount, so we have reproduced them at about 72% of (2), which is probably close to the original size of the coins. In the transcriptions we have placed in brackets those letters which should be there grammatically, but have either been omitted in error, or else are not legible because of being off the flan or

because of wear. In a few instances a blank space has been left because we are uncertain of what the reading should be.

Min Raza Gyi (Salim Shah); 955 - 974 BE; 1593-1612 AD

On his accession Min Raza Gyi struck a coin dated 955, with his Muslim name Salim Shah transliterated in all the languages and his Pali title - Naradibbati, meaning Ruler of Men - in Arakanese. "inet,

10.13 gm (ANS 1928.999.26) 10.30 gm (RS 7.11: BM) 10.10 gm (RS 7.12: BM) also: Ref (2) 8.7 - 9.3 gm

## Obv..

2 TO Naradi Ruler of Men, ¥ عن‎ bbati Saw Salim Shah,

##, نه‎ > ae Shah

## 09)

## Rev.

J ل‎ \|. (al-) malik (a)l - 'adil The just king, stb: 9 ا‎ Salim Shah Sultan Salim Shah Sultan - - a  $$ = $$ Sri Sri Salim The most exalted, Salim 2. 2) ام) »\[ لإ ‎  Saha Shah

In Ref. (2) San Tha Aung illustrated three coins (weights unknown) on pls. 20, 27 and 28. The first he dated

as 660 BE and ascribed it to the Launggyet dynasty, and the other two to Setkyawadi (1564 - 71 AD) and Min Palaung (1571 - 93 AD). However, all three coins seem to be the same as no. 7.13 in Ref. (1). All four are shown below: - pl. 20 pl. 27
The date on coin 7.13 appears to be 960 (compare with the Arakanese '9' on other coins), rather than 660, which would in any case seem to be far too early for a coin of this style. Although this date would appear to place the coin in the reign of Min Raza Gyi, none of the inscriptions refers to any of this ruler's known names, except Naradibbati. The style of the obverse is similar to coin 1, but the reverse is quite different.

We know that in 960 BE Min Raza Gyi began his campaign with the Prince of Toungou against Nandabayin, King of Pegu. The campaign was successful and the king of Pegu was sent as a prisoner to Toungou, where he was secretly put to death in 1599. The king of Arakan returned with considerable plunder, including a white elephant. Although none of the coin inscriptions is clear at the point where the king's name should be, the most likely reading seems to be Nanda, and the most likely explanation is that Min Raza Gyi adopted the name of the defeated ruler in celebration of his conquest. The alternative, that Nandabayin struck the one and only silver coin type of Pegu in the year of his downfall, seems rather unlikely. Also, according to ref. (2), some authorities say that Min Raza Gyi issued coins on four occasions. So maybe this is one.

## Obv. C6 0

0 10 Naradibba ruler of men Or V6 oy ti uri daw royal uncle (on the mother's side)?

## Maha Nanda (?)

\[letters following Maha are uncertain\] 006\] w Ublw Baya (2) Rev. 22>W slw زر‎ iwa(4) Sultan Sultan (Ma)hananda Shah Mahananda Shah

é (Sultan?) Maha Na? (Sultan Mahana) 7 THR! (nd)a? Saha nanda Shah Our reading of this coin is very tentative, pending further specimens showing the missing letters.

The White Elephant acquired from Pegu was much prized. So, soon after his return, Min Raza Gyi issued a coin to announce his trophy: -

Ashmolean: 10.34 gm Domrow: 9.6 gm Also BM (RS 7.10: 9.67 gm), BM (10.04 gm), Domrow (9.95 gm), Dacca (10.16) gm, ref. 2 (9.6 - 10 gm)

## y, CL 6

208k au Hsin byu shi Owner of the White Elephant:وغ‎ 08 5  ١ n Naradibba Ruler of men 2 صاحب لفيل سات‎ ti Sawlei Salim by (عاجل‎ lp بيض‎ m Shah Shah Rev. © AO أن 5 أطا:‎ Sahib (a)l - fil Lord of the White Elephant, slit (al-a)byad (al-) malik al-adil the just king ddi7cy 84 = Salim Shah Sultan Salim Shah Sultan Wea Dhavala Gajesvara Lord of the White Elephant Sri Sri Salim (Lit.: White Elephant Lord) TRI Saha the most exalted Salim Shah Note: on some coins (eg. Ashmolean) the 'm' in Salim is in the last line of the Bengali inscription. The coin from the Dacca Museum was published and read by A. Karim (3), and it was this article that provided the key to the readings of the other Arabic and Bengali legends.
Min Khamaung (Hussain Shah); 974 - 984 BE; 1612-1622 AD

Min Raza Gyi was succeeded by Min Khamaung who took the Muslim name Hussain Shah and the Hindu name Waradhamma Raja. His first coin is shown below: -

RS 7.14 (9.52 gm: BM) RS 7.15 (10.04 gm: BM) Also: ref. (2): 9.9 - 10 gm

## CVs

Obv.,. vocly 2 Hsin byu shin ني‎ Waradhamma Ra 0105 T za Ushau اد‎ 2.  J u=Lo ng Shah Rev. € 29), Sahib )2(1 - fil

## nyasuH hahS ‏natluS حسين ‏sele اطلسن q mics 2 4 Dhavala Gajesvara‏ 1

## irS irS amahD ‏ajaR na  Nd anahc)uH( ‏ahaS d6 ‏lel

# 50ج ١ ١ ‎ LIL RS 7.15 var. (9.98 gm: BM) 974 BE Owner of the White Elephant Waradhamma Ra ja Hussai n Shah

## Lord of the White Elephant

١ل مللا لعا‎ Ax (al-a)byad (al-)malik )3(1-'2011 the just king

Hussain Shah Sultan Lord of the White Elephant the most exalted Dhama Raja Hussain Shah

Afterwards, Min Khamaung must have acquired a red elephant, as shown by the following coin which was first published in a J. Schulman auction catalogue (4) and is now in the American Numismatic Society collection: -

## ٍ: $$ 20 $ » £01 $$

# 683 22 حي c ‏YA صا حب لفيل بيض دود دع Hsin byu thakhin Hsin ni thakhin Wara dhamma Raza U

## shaung Shah

bihaS lif-l)a( ‏dayb)a-la( 91 لا حمر ملل لعأ was زان‎ \| J ) va سيا‎ (al-)malik (a)l-'a

## il

(al-)sultan Husayn 34104 1531059 Dhavala lohit (?) Gajesva 41 جع إ5 لك لهل‎ SriSri Dhama Raja صي" \| سلث \| انث ال اد Rev. 10.06 gm (ANS 1920.999.12)

Lord of the White Elephant, Lord of the Red Elephant, Wara dhamma Raja Hu ssain Shah Lord of the White and Red

Elephants, the just king Sultan Hussain Lord of the White and Red Elephants, the most exalted Dhama Raja,

Notice that in the Arakanese text the word 'Owner' has been replaced by 'Lord'. In the Arabic note the

reversal of Sultan and Husayn from coin 4, and the absence of 'Shah' from this and subsequent coins. The

second word of the Bengali legend is not clear, but is presumably 'Lohit', or some other form of this Sanskrit

word meaning 'red'. The last line of the Bengali legend is totally flat and illegible.
Another issue of coins was made in 981 BE. The coin in ref. (2) plate 32 shows the date clearly: -

Ref. (2) plate 32 (9.2 - 9.6 gm) Ce) Obv. ER ak \| 981 BE \|

## € 25558

Hsin byu thakhin Lord of the White Elephant eee Hsin ni thakhin M Lord of the Red Elephant, بيزض 2 مد وا‎ LY صأ حي‎ in Tya Gyi U Min Tya Gyi > 7 وير‎ shaung Shah Hussain Shah Rey, 202 حمر ملل لداعل‎ Sahib (a)l-fil (al-a)byad Lord of the White and Red kilam)-la( lida'l)a(,stnahpelE eht tsuj dna ythzim,‏gnik طسقتة "1 و لا ظعطلم اطلسن %5cA4¢ledY  -  mazza')um-la(  natluS  nyasuH natluS ‏niassuH

R PUR VEAP Vcc Dhaval aruna Gajesvara Lord of the White and Red Elephants - - ra Maha Dhamma Raja  the great Dhamma Raja (Hu)chana Saha Hussain Shah

Note the change of title. This was sometimes done if considered auspicious. The use of the same Muslim and Hindu names shows that this is not a coin of a new ruler with the accession date 981. Thirithudhamma: 984-1000 BE; 1622-1638 AD Also: RS 7.16 (9.95 gm: BM)

## Obv. Coy

984 BE هام‎ »a Hsin byu thakh Lord of the White Elephant Ene 24546 in Hsin ni thakhin Lord of the Red Elephant, دمع‎ am a one Juss Lo Thirithudh Thirithudhamma D1 RO Avy حي‎ ) ولا‎ aw VI amma Raza Raja. Rev. ن‎ PCD tO 7 بهص‎ YT Sahib (a)l-fil Lord of the White POWYS" al-abyad wa 'l-ahmar and Red Elephants, ddalddidcs Sri Tittudharma the exalted Thirithudhamma 37 217 Dhaval arun Gajesva Lord of the White and Red Elephants

ra Sri Sri Thadhara the most exalted Thadharma at Ho mma Raja Raja As can be seen, Thirithudhamma used his Hindu name in the Arabic inscription, as well as in the Bengali and Arakanese: and indeed he may never have received any Muslim name. In 996 BE he issued his coronation coin with an inscription in Arakanese only (see ONS Newletter 77), and his successors did not use Bengali or Arabic. This may have been due to gradual loss of influence in Chittagong, the only area of Arakan with a substantial Muslim population; although this territory was only

finally captured by the Moghuls in 1666.