# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

## NEWSLETTER No. 130 August - October 1991

## ONS News

1.  The India Coin Study Day held at the British Museum Coin & Medal Department on Saturday 31 August proved to be a very interesting and successful event. Around 25 members attended and it was particularly pleasing to be able to welcome a number of members from India, who were due to attend the International Numismatic Congress in Brussels a week later. The following papers were read:

- S. Gupta  Ancient Coinage of Vidarba - Cribb  Vaishnava Images on Kushan Coins Prof. Handa Coins of the Yaudheyas - G. Rhodes  Late Coins of the Kashmir Sultanate - P. Kulkami  = New Mughal Coin Discoveries - C. Senior  A New Chronology for the Western Satraps? Afterwards a group of those attending enjoyed a pleasant meal together in an Indian Restaurant.

2.  The next ONS meeting in London will be on Saturday 16 November, 11.00-13.00 at the British Museum Coin and Medal

Department. There will be the usual annual auction and, it is hoped, a short talk. In the afternoon between 14.00 and 16.30 the Society

for South Asian Studies, Numismatic Section, will hold a seminar on the coins of the Indian Sultanates at the same venue. ONS members are welcome to attend.

3.  I am running short of articles. Articles are therefore required on all oriental numismatic subjects, including unpublished Indian medals.

## Other News

1.  \|The Numismatic Society of Calcutta will be holding its first annual conference and coin exhibition in November this year. For further information please contact Mr Debasish Paul...

2.  Spink Taisei, Ziirich, held an auction of Coins of the Islamic World on 16 September. The 554 lots contained a wide range of Islamic material, including many rare items.

3.  The current display outside the British Museum Coin & Medal Department is devoted to the coinage of the Sultans of Bengal. Devised by Venetia Porter, the display comprises a wide range of the Sultanate coinage together with engravings of historic buildings and examples of contemporary calligraphy from inscriptions. The display continues until 24 November 1991.
## New & Recent Publications

1.  A very important new work due out now is a Standard Catalogue of Sultanate Coins of India by Dilip Rajgor. This book should fill a long felt need by collectors of this type of material. Previous compilations, e.g. Donald Hull's Collectors Guide for Mohammedan Coins of India, or the Indian section of Dr Mitchiner's Oriental Coins & their values, left a good deal to be desired. The new book is expected to be far more exhaustive and will give values in Indian rupees for three grades of preservation (where appropriate). It will not, however, provide details of the legends on the coins apart from what can be seen in the numerous illustrations. The book will cost 495 Indian rupees (plus postage) and can be obtained from Rajesh Jain, 201 Bupindra Office Complex, 59 Rani Jhansi Road, New Delhi 110055 India, and presumably from other outlets in due course.

a Tawfiq Ibrahim and Julio Jiménez Gil have compiled a Bibliography of the Numismatics of Islamic Spain. It is published by the Sociedad Ibero-americana de Estudios Numismaticos in collaboration with the Fabrica Nacional de Moneda y Timbre, 1990.

Zz. Tawfiq Ibrahim has also published an article entitled 'Un dirhem Inedito de Muhammad ibn Sa'd, "ibn Madarnis", in Gaceta Numismatica (Asociacién Numismatica Espafiola, Barcelona), March 1991.

4.  Spink Numismatic Circular for September 1991 contains a review by Joe Cribb of R E Darley-Doran's recently published book on the currency of the Sultanate of Oman (mentioned in Newsletter 129). The October 1991 issue contained an article by R C Senior entitled 'The Indo-Greek/Scythian succession and coin types'.

5.  The following lists have been received: - Stephen Album - lists 77, 78, 79 and 80. ii. Omar Hamidi (Persic Gallery, PO Box 10317, Torrance, CA 90505, USA) - list no. 29, of Islamic, Indian, Bactrian & Central Asian coinages. ili. N. Economopoulos and W B Warden, Jr. - Historia Numismatica II, Ancient & Islamic Coins Fixed Price List. iv. R. D. Shah (9 Lansdowne Grove, London NW10 1LP, UK) - a short list of Mughal and other Indian coins. - Robert Tye (Locheynort, South Uist, Western Isles, PA81 5SJ, UK) - Books, summer 1991 and List 23. The latter contains an interesting article on the Indian Sultan 'Ala-ud-din Muhammad Khalji.

6.  Available from the Indian Books Centre, 40/5 Shakti Nagar, Delhi 110 007, India, is a translation by Osmund Bopearachchi of Olivier Guillaume's book Graeco-Bactrian and Indian coins from Afghanistan, Rs 140. Corrigendum

On page 2 of Newsletter 129, under New & Recent Publications, we mentioned an article by Dick Mauta that appeared in Spink Numismatic Circular February 1991 as "An Undescribed Medal of the Khalifa". This should have read "An Undescribed coin of the Khalifa". Mr. Nauta has noted that, by a strange coincidence, another specimen of this coin appeared on Steve Album's list no. 72 at around the same time as his Spink article.

# MISCELLANY OF MEDIAEVAL NORTH AFRICAN NUMISMATICS - I. Tawfiq Ibrahim

The three unpublished coins described below are part of a hoard of Spanish Umayyad dirhams (Emirate period) found in Puebla de Cazalla (Seville). A complete study of the hoard will be published in a forthcoming edition of NUMISMA (Madrid) by Alberto Canto

and the author of this note. Illustrations are x 1.5.

1. Dirham of Aghlabid ruler Abu 'Iqal al-Aghlab b. Ibrahim I. (223/837-226/840), date 226 H, mint Ifriqiya, weight 2.6g (with addition), diameter 23 mm. Reverse Obverse

#  دّمحم رسول‎ لآاالة الا‎

# الله

صلى الله ء‎ الله وحده‎ #البسسكية‎ لا شريك له‎ الاغلب‎

# بسم الله ضرب هذا

الدرهم يقرفابة سنة ست و يرشعن و يتيمن.:‏MO:MR  naroK ‏9.16

Al-Ush does not register any silver for this ruler. The addition observed on this coin is very typical of the Emirate period where clipped coins are, by this method, regularly augmented in weight.
2. Dirham (fragment) of Idrisid Yahya I 5. Muhammad (234/849-249/863), date 247H, mint Walila, weight 1.0g. Obverse Reverse (رابالله‎ peal ووو و و ووو‎

3 د!\_ صم#ح#غدددد26سخحمىلا1ىمللعيحش مل ممم بممبب70000م" "و00‎ 2 SY oe

## (j;-» SS

## لا شريك له اا للك‎

## 0/١ بوليله سنة سبع و اربعين‎ -- 5) weer RM.: Koran 61.9 (fragment)

Heustache does not register any such late date for the mint of Walila. In his listing (p. 178), during the reign of Idris II (192/808-213/820), the mint of Walila (Roman Volibulis) stops striking coins in the year 209 H. In 191 H. this ruler had his capital moved from Walila to Fas, and it seems as if hereafter Walila gradually loses its relative importance as its cessation as a mint indicates. The atypical and for the moment singular reappearance of Walila as a mint after nearly four decades of inactivity is only understandable if we assume the permanent and endemic fragmentation of Idrisid power. Of this, as can be deduced from his known coinage, the reign of Yahya I is a clear example, where as various mints strike sporadically in his name no coins are known of Fas, the only city actually in his control.

3. Dirham of Sulaimanid 'Isa b. Ibrahim (?273/886-274/887?), date 273H, mint Madinat 'Isa b. Ibrahim, weight 2.85 gr., diameter 26.5 mm. Obverse Reverse

# عيسى‎ محمد لآ ‏aY

# رسول الله وحده

# الله لا شريك له

# بن أبرهيم

# 212 بسم الله ضرب هذا

الدرهم بمدينة عيسى بن ابرهيم سنة ثلث و نيعبس و نيتيم‎ RM.: Koran 61.9.

Lowick only registers, for this ruler and mint, a very rare dirham dated 274H.

Bibliography: Al-Ush, Muhammad abu-l-Faraj, Monnaies Aglabides, Damascus, 1982. Eustache, Corpus de dirhams Idrisites et contemporains, Rabat, 1970-71. Lowick, N.M., "Monnaies des Sulaymanids", Revue Numismatique, 1983.

## A Rare Umayyad Dirham of Adharbaijan by Michael Broome Re te

The Umayyad province of Adharbaijan is in the north west corner of Persia between the Caspian Sea and Lake Urmia. It was conquered by the arabs c. AH20 but, being on the extreme edge of the Umayyad territory, was left fairly much to itself. Early Islamic coins from Adharbaijan are scarce with only a small Arab-Sasanian issue of silver drachms in AH62 and 63 with the mint signature ATRA attributed to it. It is not until AH10S that standard Umayyad dirhams appear there and then were produced for two years only, probably

at the provincial capital, Ardabil, which itself was shortly afterwards captured by the Khazars.

It is therefore interesting that a new 'and unusual post-reform dirham, named to Adharbaijan and dated AH78, has appeared in a private collection in Aleppo. When Walker published his catalogue of the post-reform coinage in 1956, no coins earlier than AH79

were known and he was of the opinion that the existence of a mintless dirham of that year indicated the beginning of the reform of the silver coinage. Since then, a few specimens dated 78 have turned up and it may be significant that the first of these came from Armenia, the next province to Adharbaijan.

Almost uniquely amongst Umayyad dirhams, the present coin departs from the standard layout in a number of respects. The most obvious is the transposition of the marginal legends so that the mint/date formula appears on the reverse instead of on the obverse, as is usual. In this respect, the design follows that of the contemporary gold dinars although the reverse legend is the extended version
used only on the dirhams. In addition, the obverse margin is separated from the central legend by a beaded circle and the reverse legend is spread over 5 lines instead of the normal 4.

It is clear that this piece is not a standard issue based on a pattern sent out from Damascus although the actual legend is orthodox in all respects. The script is typical for the period although the angular form of the 'lamalifs' is not found on other contemporary dirhams. Possibly the coin could just be the uncontrolled product of an engraver in an outlying area doing his best with only a gold dinar and a written instruction to guide him. Alternatively, it could have been made for a special purpose, such as a pattern for the new dirhams but this seems quite unlikely with a mint name in the far provinces. Or it could be an unauthorised concoction!

Final conclusions must await an inspection of the coin itself but this preliminary report will enable other students of the series to consider what lessons might be drawn from this particular coin. I am indebted to Mr A. D. for enabling me to publish this interesting piece of Islamic numismatic history. Note:. I understand from Dr Bates that the only other AH78 dirham recorded is from 55200 al-Taymara and the total is only three known. Both he and Mr. Djaroueh have reminded me that the mint name ATRA is no longer attributed to Adharbaijan so the new dirham is the first coin from that mint. Mr. Shamma reports that al-Hajjaj is said to have asked his provincial governors for advice on the design of the reformed dirhams. The coins from Armenia and Adharbaijan may therefore be patterns that were not adopted whereas that from 51300 al-Taymara was accepted.

## Classification and Characteristics of Turkish Republican Coinage by Tevfik Seno Arda

The number of different coins minted and circulated in the republican period exceeds 260, even without detailed differentiation. To describe all these coins in a single table would serve only to confuse. Besides, rapid inflation means that the face value of coins is an inappropriate means of classification. It is better to group coins chronologically, describing important differences within those chronological boundaries, in a similar fashion to the classification of banknotes.

Extending the study right up to the present day, 1990, it is possible to group the coins circulated into six major series. The series, and the significant characteristics of the coins in each series, are outlined below. However, this brief study does not detail the pits and other imperfections caused by residue and dust in the dies.

In the following tables, coins which are relatively common are identified by the sign "+. The tags "R" to "4R" record the degree of rarity of other coins.

THE FIRST SERIES The first series covers coins dated 1340 and 1341, 1926 and 1928. They are inscribed in Arabic, having been minted prior to the alphabet reform. This series can be subdivided into two.

1A: Coins bearing the Islamic dates 1341 and 1341. 1B: Coins bearing the Anno Domini dates of 1926 and 1928.

25K 10K 5K 100P Remarks as + (1A) + + + + 4R + )18( 3R 4R 3R

Extremely fine coins of the year 1340 are less easily found than those of the other years. Of interest are the easily identifiable die differences between the standard 10 kurus piece of 1340 and the "lower spike" coins of that year. Similarly, "upper spike" 25 kurus of 1928, differ markedly from the standard piece of that denomination for that year. These coins with die variations are sufficiently uncommon to earn an "R" in terms of rarity. The importance assigned to these coins will depend upon the evaluation made by collectors.

The first series seems, at first sight, to include only four different denominations. But these were supplemented by the 40, 20, 10 and 5 para nickel coins of Ottoman manufacture, still in circulation at that time. There was, in fact, an overall range of eight denominations. For the same reason, the Ottoman nickel coins minted during the reigns of, and therefore bearing the dates of Mehmed Reshad's and Medmed Vahidiiddin's imperial accession (1327 and 1336 respectively), can also be included amongst the range of Republican coinage.

# THE SECOND SERIES

The second series covers coins minted between 1934 and 1946. Besides the main series there are two subgroups that should be considered in this chronological band.

- The silver 100 kurus piece, dated 1934. This coin displays quite unique features.

ii. The silver 1 lira of 1940 and 1941, bearing Indnii's portrait. Also the 25 kurus coin, minted in 1944, 1945 and 1946, with crescent and star on the obverse side.

The 25 kurus of the first series, colloquially known as "bull's eye" and made of nickel, were made of silver following the economic boom years of 1935-37. But the crisis precipitated by World War Two forced a return to aluminium-bronze alloy.

10, 5 and 1 kurus coins, classed as "R", are very difficult to find in extremely fine condition. On the coins in the second series, with the exception of smooth edged 1 kurus and 10 para pieces, the "T.C." inscription appeared for the first time on the edge, 1.e. third dimension of the coin. The inscription is always in the 'normal' position due to the stamping technique used.

Collectors concerned with die variations will be interested in the three different star sizes to be found on the 100 kums pieces of 1934.

100K/ 1L 50K 25K. 10K 5K 1K 10P Remarks R (2A) + + R R R Main + + R R R series + 2R $$ = $$ R + R 2R + + + + ~ +
# + + R + + + + + ++++2 + + )28(

# THE THIRD SERIES

Coins minted between 1947 and 1957 fall into the third chronological series (except for the nickel 1 lira piece of 1957). The last silver coins, one lira and 50 kurus denominations, were minted in 1947 and 1948. They were fashioned from an alloy of only low silver content (600/1000).

Although the 1/2 kurus coins minted in 1948 were not officially put into circulation, they are still found in most large collections. This is because 150 of the 600 coins issued were distributed among high ranking government officials. Furthermore, rumour has it that an important part of the remaining 450 were somehow released onto the market.

# 1L

50K 25K 10K 5K 2 1/2K 1K 1/2K + + R + + + + + 3R + + + + + + + + R - - +  R + + + + + + + +

There were trial issues of 10 and 5 kurus pieces in 1948. But these coins are very rare. An important characteristic of the third series coins is the presence of the inscription "TURKIYE CUMHURIYETI" on the edge. Exceptions to this are the 2 1/2 kurus, 1 kurus and 1/2 kurus coins with smooth edges. When the inscribed edge coins are obverse side up, the edge inscription can be either upright, or, with equal probability, upside down. Many collectors have one coin with an upright inscription, and another with an inverted inscription.

# THE FOURTH SERIES

The 1957 dated nickel 1 lira can be considered as the prototype for coins issued between 1958 and 1980: the fourth series. It is possible to subdivide this series according to thickness of flan and composition of alloy. The silver 10 lira of 1960, issued in memory of the May 27 revolution, was publicly circulated, and can be considered part of this series, albeit with a somewhat special status.

The 1 lira, 10 kurus, 5 kurus and 1 kurus coins all underwent alloy changes. The 1957 1 lira is of a nickel alloy. Those of later years are of a stainless steel alloy. As for the 10 and 5 kurus coins, those issued from 1958 to 1974, were made of a bronze alloy with a

high copper ratio. Those struck between 1975 and 1977 were made of aluminium. The composition of 1 kurus coins was changed twice. These coins were struck in brass until 1963. They were struck on bronze flans, as were their 10 and 5 kurus contemporaries between 1963 and 1974. From 1975 to 1977, the 1 kurus coins were struck in aluminium. Note that in 1963, both brass and bronze 1 kurus pieces were issued.

In terms of flan thickness, and the resultant weight of coins, changes took place in the form of 2 1/2 lira, 1 lira, 25 kurus, 10 kurus and 5 kurus pieces. The stainless steel alloy 2 1/2 lira struck between 1960 and 1968 was on a 12 gram flan. But 2 1/2 lira coins were reduced to 9 gram flans between the years 1969 and 1980. The stainless steel 1 lira coin, issued between 1959 and the very early days of 1967, was on an 8 gram flan. It was reduced to 7 grams between the years 1967 and 1980. The change took place in early 1967. Therefore, although coins of both weights can be found dated that year, the thicker 8 gram flans are rare.

Shs 2 1/2L IL 50K 25K 10K 5K 1K Remarks + (4A) + + + + 1K: brass + bronze له ل بل اباي 25K: thick + thin 1L: thick + thin

## حنم عق بقع حا eaw ‏tT + + + + اهاي ve

ل سه بج له بل سب لس ب له ع بس عه سه له له واد‎ + + بي بي هد 4 + ل ب +++ +

‏DA ل لج جب جه لج سب جب سج ع جب ع ع بج لس له له هاي + بج لج بج بج ب ب بج ب لب بج ب ون يد

+ ل لج جه جب ب ل ل بج ب ب بج ب ب بل ب ب ب به هادي ان + به ب ب ب ب ب ب ب ب ب بهد 4+

Between 1959 and 1966, 25 kurus coins were struck on 5 gram stainless steel alloy flans. The flan weight was reduced to 4 grams in

1966. In 1966 itself, coins of both weights were issued.
The thickness of the bronze 10 kurus coin was changed twice. The 4 gram flans issued between 1958 and 1968 were superseded by 3.5 gram flans between 1969 and 1973, and a 2.5 gram flan in 1974. Similarly the bronze 5 kurus coin, 2.5 grams between 1958 and 1968, was reduced to 2 grams between 1969 and 1973, and then to 1.35 grams in 1974.

In the fourth series, the edge inscription is encountered on the 2 1/2 lira, 25 kurus and the stainless steel alloy 1 lira coins. These edge inscriptions, which are in the form of "T. C." on 2 1/2 lira and 25 kurus coins, and in the form of "TURKIYE CUMHURIYETI" on 1 lira pieces, can, with equal probability, be positioned upright or upside down, as in the third series coins. It is necessary to mention a few mint errors manifest in the edge inscriptions of fourth series coins. They are of special interest to many collectors. A small fraction of the 1 lira coins dated 1966 and 1975 are not stamped "TURKIYE CUMHURIYETI", but, erroneously, "CUMHURIYETI CUMHURIYETI". The misprinted inscription can be encountered in both the normal and upside down positions. The erroneously stamped coins of 1966 can be classified as 2R to 3R. The 1975 dated errors are of R to 2R rarity.

In a small fraction of 1976 2 1/2 lira coins and 1967 25 kurus coins, the edge inscription "T.C.", repeated twice, is in tétebéche position - on the same coin, one of the "T.C." inscriptions is upright, the other is upside down. 1967 25 kurus coins exhibiting téte-béche inscriptions are of 2R to 3R rarity. Téte-béche 2 1/2 lira coins of 1976 are of only R rarity.

Another important die difference can be observed on the bronze 10 kurus coins of 1974. On most of that year's 10 kurus coins, the diagonal and vertical strokes comprising the numeral 4 meet at the top. But on a small number of the coins, the diagonal and vertical strokes fail to converge completely, and an opening is left at the top of the figure. Those coins with open-top numeral 4's can be classified as of R rarity.

On the 5 kurus coins of 1974 another die idiosyncrasy can be observed. On all 5 kurus coins there is an acorn motif. Except in 1974, the acorm shells are empty. On most 5 kurus coins of the year 1974, the acorn cases still bear their fruit. But on a small number of those 1974 coins, the acorn shells are empty and that coincides with an albeit barely discernible open top numeral 4. These last coins can be classified as of R rarity.

In the fourth series, minor die differences, not detailed in this study, small spots resulting from die debris etc. can also be found.

# THE FIFTH SERIES

Coins issued from 1981 to 1988 constitute the fifth series. These Republican period coins, minted during a period when the value of money underwent a rapid decline, due to the high rate of inflation, testify to the search for a suitable form that lasted until

1984. The motive on the obverse side, the calligraphic type of the inscription, and the direction of the crescent were continuously being altered. The final form of the series was settled in 1984. A further small change was effected in 1985, with the issue of the 25 lira denomination, to supersede the 20 lira coin.

100L 25L, 20L 10L SL i Remarks + + + Prototype + + + Series + + + + + + + Main + + + + + + Series $$ = $$ + + + + R + + + + R R + + R R R

It is worth remarking on the change in the direction of the crescent. Until the end of 1984, the crescent was reproduced in such a way that it symbolised the new moon, that is the youth and vigour of the state. It is now portrayed facing the opposite direction, with the opposite symbolic meaning. The change was the result, I believe, of a misguided decision.

There are no edge inscriptions on coins of the fifth series. The decision, by the Mint Directorate, to continue the production of the smaller denomination coins of this series through 1986 and 1988 was, from our numismatic point of view, very fortuitous.

# THE SIXTH SERIES

The limited number of coins which have been issued since mid-1988 can be described as the sixth series. At the moment, there are no edge inscriptions on sixth series coins.

1000L SOL Remarks + + + + + + + + October 1990

Note: The author declares his indebtedness to his friends Mr. Sinan Kulag and Mr. Edwin Latter, for their kind assistance in the translation of this text.

## Where was the silver coin of the Turkish-Islamic Republic of Eastern Turkestan minted? by Francois Thierry

Some points lead me to question the origin of the silver coin of the Turkish-Islamic Republic of Eastern Turkestan! discussed by N. G. Rhodes in the ONSNL no. 129:

1.  The coin looks very nice, regular and is very well struck; the calligraphy is beautiful and harmonious. It is hard to believe that this coin was minted in the same mint as the badly struck 20 cash copper coins of Kashgar. 2.  The coin is clearly a milled coin. Kashgar did not have any minting machinery; all the copper coins of Kashgar minted in 1352H are hammered coins; before and after 1933-34, the whole production both in silver and in copper consists of hammered coins too.., 3.  On this coin, the name of the city is written رع شاك ‎ i.e. Kash Gar, in two words )  ْح‎ is the initial form of gayn), whereas on the copper coins, it is always written "&" Kashgar, in one word (sis the medial form of gayn). 4.  The use of the numeral in brackets is typical of Afghan coins after the adoption of the decimal system in 1926. 5.  The use of the word meskuk, for coin on this coin is surprising. Where does this use come from? Could it not be a weight denomination?
6.  The size corresponds to the rupees, as noted by N. G. Rhodes. These points lead me to the conclusion that this coin was not minted in Kashgar but probably in Kabul. We must bear in mind that Afghanistan was the only state which supported the TIRET: in November 1933 King Muhammad Zaher Shah sent official congratulations to Kashgar on the foundation of the Republic. The leader of this Republic, Mehmet Emin Bugra sent a delegation to Kabul in January 1934. This embassy was accepted at governmental level and an agreement was signed for providing arms and establishing a representative official of Afghanistan in Kashgar. It is possible that the Afghan authorities minted this coin at the

request of Emin Bugra or for congratulatory purposes. Note:

1. From May to September 1933, the Turkish independent State is the Uighuristan Republic, under the leadership of Timur, chief of the Uighurs, supported by Osman the leader of the Kirghiz tribes and by the Young Kashgar Party. But at this time the east of the Republic was under the control of

the Amirs of Khotan, leaders of the former Islamic Government of Khotan. Taking advantage of the death of Timur in August 1933, the Khotanese Amir Mehmet Emin Bugra took possession of Kashgar in September and proclaimed the Turkish-Islamic Republic of Eastern Turkestan (TIRET) on 12 November. The Uighuristan Republic minted only 10 cash copper coins and the TIRET only 20 cash copper coins. (A. Forbes, Warlords and Muslims in the Chinese Central Asia, a political history of republican Sinkiang 1911-1949, Cambridge 1984; Frangois Thierry, "Les monnaies du Turkestan Oriental 1933-1934", Bulletin de la Société Frangaise de Numismatique, No. 8, Oct. 1990, p.907-910).

## Copper Coins of the Chudasama Dynasty of Gujarat by Dilip Rajgor

During our field work on the Numismatic Chronology of Gujarat we have come across a few dozen coins which - though unpublished -

are well known from Saurashtra. Nine such coins are published hereunder. We are thankful to Mr B. P. Rupani for allowing us to photograph and publish the following two coins. - Coins of Mahipaldeva

1. Copper, 2.500g, 11 x 9mm, provenance: Rajkot district. Obverse: A walking elephant to left; around, a beaded border. Reverse: Legend raha shri/ mahapa/ la de. Around, a circular border of dots.

2. Copper, 2.300g, 9mm, provenance: Junagarh district. Obverse: as no. 1. Reverse: Legend raha shri/ mahipa/ la da. From the coins it is clear that the issuer is Ra' (meaning Rau - king) Mahipaldeva. But who was this Mahipal?

The Chudasamas, with their capital at Vamansthali - modern Vanthali near Junagarh - ruled for more than 400 years in Saurashtra. Chandrachuda (Chudachandra), the founder of the dynasty, ascended the throne after his maternal uncle in c. AD875. In his line, the fourteenth ruler was Ra' Mahipal. History tells us that a son of Rayasimha was known as Gajaraja (king of elephants), who ascended the throne after his father. He was known as Gajaraja Ra' Mahipal (AD 1184-1201). The presence of a Gaja (elephant) on the coins, the legend, and the palaeography of the coins provide clues in locating the issuer of the coins. It would, thus, not be a farfetched assumption to ascribe these coins to Mahipal of the Chudasama dynasty. II. Copper coins of a later period.

3. Copper, 2.150g, 11mm, provenance: Rajkot. Obverse: A humped bull standing to left. Reverse: Legend shriha in a circle, enclosed within a dotted circle.

4. Copper, 4.6008, 15 x 14mm, provenance: Junagarh. Obverse: A walking elephant to left; around, a beaded border. Reverse: As no. 3.

5. Copper, 1.200g, 5 x 6mm, provenance: Junagarh. Obverse: A duck to left; around, a circular border of dots. Reverse: As no. 3.
6. Copper, 2.150g, 6mm, provenance: Junagarh. Obverse: A duck to nght; around, a beaded border. Reverse: As no 33.

7. Copper, 2.7008, 13 x 11mm, provenance: Junagarh. Obverse: A conch-shell; around, a circular border of dots. Reverse: As no. 3.

8. Copper, 2.100g, 11 x 12mm, provenance: Junagarh. Obverse: Sa in Devanagari; around, a beaded border. Reverse: Shri in Devanagari; around, a beaded border.

9. Copper, 0.900g, 11 x 12mm, provenance: Junagarh. Obverse: As no. 8. Reverse: As no. 8. From the typology it is clear that these seven coins were issued at a later date. But unlike the coins of Mahipal, there is no full legend on any of them. With the little information available to us, it is difficult to attribute these coins to any particular ruler. Tentatively it can only be suggested that these were the issues of later rulers of the Chudasama dynasty and/or of succeeding dynasties in SaurashtraGujarata.

## A New Type of Bhutanese Copper Coin by N G Rhodes

Of all modern coins, Bhutanese must be the least well published and the most obscure. The coins published here, for the first time, are all struck from the same reverse die, and were hence presumably all struck at the same place and within a short time of each other.

The obverses are struck from at least three different dies, two of which are of an unpublished variety with the letter 'Sa' and a swastika on a large chequer-board design. The third obverse die is of the normal Cooch Behar type of Period 1111, but showing the letter 'ndra' retrograde, while the letter 'Sa' is the correct way round to the right of the letter. This arrangement of the obverse is very unusual, and I have not yet found any die-links with other reverses. All the dies are much larger than the flan, so that different parts of the dies are visible on different specimens.

The reverse die is of the normal Cooch Behar type, but shows two states, the second with an 'x' engraved in the centre of the letter 'cha'.

As is often the case with Bhutanese coins of the late nineteenth century, the weights vary considerably, and the metal is sometimes of a yellow brassy colour, while other coins appear to be pure copper.

The coins can be described as follows: Obv. 5 pellets in quartered square in centre, 'Sa' below (but not visible) and swastika to right. Wt. 3.4g. Obv. As last, but 'Sa' is clearly visible. Wt. 1.7g. Obv. As last, more of lower part of die visible. Wt. 4.3g. Obv. Different die, with 'Sa' below swastika. Wt. 4.9g. Obv. die as nos. 1-3, but extra line engraved to r. of 'Sa'. Metal brassy. Wt. 1.4g. Obv. As last, but further reengraving on die. Wt. 4.2g. Obv. die as no. 4, but swastika has long arms; die perhaps reengraved. Wt. 3.9g. Obv. Normal Cooch Behar type with 'ndra' retrograde. Metal brassy. Wt. 2.5g.

Nos. 1-4 have rev. die in early state, while nos. 5-8 have the rev. die with cross in centre. As can be seen, the weights provide no help in determining the chronology of the series.

Coins such as no. 8, which links this unusual obv. type with a die of the normal series, provide useful information on classification. Links such as this are occasionally found in this series, and they provide the only help in dividing the series into mint and period groupings. Other such link coins may be published in future Newsletters, but in the meantime I would be interested to hear if anyone has a coin linking the obv. die of no. 8 with any other rev. die. Note

1. The Coinage of Bhutan, N G Rhodes, ONS Information Sheet no. 16. SN نك ا كو‎ PPS

## Another Mysterious New Coin from Nepal N G Rhodes

In ONS Newsletter 128 I published two unusual copper coins from Nepal, and Ken Wiggins kindly pointed out that he had another specimen of the coin I illustrated as no. 1. This coin was in a box of unidentified coins that also included a Nepalese copper coin of Pratap Simha (RGV.1329) among a wide variety of unusual Indian pieces. The coins had been acquired from many different sources over many years, so no Nepalese association can be proved.
# © يا 82

When looking through this box I noticed the coin illustrated as 'A' above, which not only has an obverse similar to the coin illustrated as no. 2 (see above no. © in my previous article, but also is similar to a rather lighter coin that \| obtained in Nepal several years ago, and which I illustrate above as no. B. The obv. shows traces of the same Moghul-style inscription, although rather more degenerate, while the rev. has symbols which looks rather like a tennis racket and two step-ladders, which may be the remnants of the Nagari-style inscription on the previous coins. The two new pieces weigh about 10g and Sg respectively, and are hence struck to the same weight standard as the late eighteenth century Nepalese copper coins of Prithvi Narayan, Pratap Simha and Rana Bahadur. Accordingly, I believe that these new pieces may have been struck somewhere in Nepal, and may be a further degeneration of the same series as the coins published in my previous article. This attribution must, however, remain very tentative until further specimens turn up with a firm provenance.

## Guangxi Mint during Qian Long by David Hartill

This article outlines the problems, and occasional pleasures, encountered when researching 18th century provincial Chinese coinage. Guangxi province has been selected because, although the coinage is relatively simple, the workings of the mint are well documented.

The mint was opened and closed again during the reign of Kang Xi (1662-1722). In the 7th year of Qian Long (1742) steps were taken to re-open the mint:

The Governor General of the provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi memorialises that for a long time Guangxi did not have casting established. It relied on Yunnan province to transport cash for the use of the people and the army. It seems that various districts of the aforementioned province have 100,000 catties of copper available. Permission is requested to buy up base metal and

tin for casting. A mint has been established in the provincial capital of Guilin-fu with 10 furnaces. On the reverse of the coins will be

the two characters bao gui in Manchu. Each year there will be 36 mao \[casting periods\] which will use 216,000 catties of copper, base metal, and tin. A further 'additional scrap' casting uses 21,300 catties. 28,800 strings of 'green' \[i.e. bronze\] coins will be cast.

Later on that year: Governor General Qing Fu and the Provincial Governor memorialise re the opening of furnaces in Guangxi for casting. In the Ist month of the 8th year the Board \[of Revenue\] is to issue the bao gui pattern coin. In the 3rd month on the 15th day the furnaces are to open for casting.

The Guangxi tongzhi then gives a detailed list of casting requirements: ITEM For casting bronze coins Guangxi needs to use copper, base metal, and tin. Its expenditure is to be exactly according to

the capital's mint regulations. In each 100 catties for casting use 50 catties of red copper, 41 1/2 catties of zinc, 6 1/2 catties of lead, and 2 catties of tin. Cast according to the Board's officially issued pattern coin with Qian Long tong bao on one side, and bao gui in Manchu on the other. Each coin is to weigh 1 qian 2 fen. \[4.5 grams\]

ITEM Guangxi mint buildings are established in the provincial capital at the Wen Zhang gate, enclosed within 4 walls. The principal gate has 3 rooms, the second gate 3 rooms, the principal hall 3 rooms, the copper storehouse 4 rooms, the base metal and tin storehouse 3 rooms, and the coal houses 10 rooms. There are in total 20 furnace houses each having 5 rooms. The blacksmith's

house has 1 room, the Security Official's house 3 rooms, the Casting Superintendent's house 3 rooms, the clerks' house 2 rooms, the Night Superintendent's house 2 rooms, the temple of the furnace gods 3 rooms, the local gods' shrine 1 room. The internal administration house has 1 room, the night-time internal control house 1 room. In each of the four corners of the enclosure there is a

guard house of 1 room in which the silver liangs required for work expenses are stored until the accounts for casting income are sent in.

ITEM Each furnace has one foreman, one man to stoke the fire, one man to pour the molten metal, one man of all work, one man to tend the sand, one man to brush the ashes, one man to turn the coins on a lathe, one man to polish the coins, one man to attend

to the edges, and one man to work the treadle.

| In the 12th year (1747), production problems were encountered: From the yamen of the Provincial Governor. Memorial | Requiring Imperial Sanction. When casting bronze coins, in each 100 catties of copper and base metal 2 catties of tin are included. | Because Guangxi tin is of a solid nature, the coins cast from it are brittle and easily broken when turned on the lathe or polished. | Permission is requested to reduce the amount of tin by 1 catty, and use 1 catty of zinc instead in the casting alloy. In future separate out | and make a careful count of the tin that is put in the alloy and in the accounts submitted. |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| Production was increased to 96,000 strings gross in the 14th year by adding another 8 furnaces and increasing the mao from | 600 catties to 1,000 catties. In the 35th year (1770) "The Provincial Governor memorialises that Bao Gui mint buys and transports | copper from Yunnan for casting. Because Jin Chao mine low grade copper is in short supply and not sufficient for casting, and, | moreover, official coins for circulation are stored up, permission is requested to temporarily close 7 furnaces, leaving 13." In the 38th | year "The Provincial Governor memorialises that there are not sufficient Bao Gui coins. To increase the issue, permission is requested |
| to re-open 3 furnaces in the 2nd month of the 39th year of Qian Long." However in the 43rd year (1778) "Because there is not | sufficient Yunnan copper to be bought, now close the furnaces that were re-opened, leaving 13 furnaces." In the 44th year, another | furnace was closed. (These increases and decreases in production at this time are typical of many of the provinces that relied on Yunnan | for their copper.) Finally in the 59th year: "All provincial casting is to be temporarily halted for one or two years, because the coin | price in the capital is too cheap." |

Production was increased to 96,000 strings gross in the 14th year by adding another 8 furnaces and increasing the mao from 600 catties to 1,000 catties. In the 35th year (1770) "The Provincial Governor memorialises that Bao Gui mint buys and transports copper from Yunnan for casting. Because Jin Chao mine low grade copper is in short supply and not sufficient for casting, and, moreover, official coins for circulation are stored up, permission is requested to temporarily close 7 furnaces, leaving 13." In the 38th year "The Provincial Governor memorialises that there are not sufficient Bao Gui coins. To increase the issue, permission is requested

to re-open 3 furnaces in the 2nd month of the 39th year of Qian Long." However in the 43rd year (1778) "Because there is not sufficient Yunnan copper to be bought, now close the furnaces that were re-opened, leaving 13 furnaces." In the 44th year, another furnace was closed. (These increases and decreases in production at this time are typical of many of the provinces that relied on Yunnan for their copper.) Finally in the 59th year: "All provincial casting is to be temporarily halted for one or two years, because the coin price in the capital is too cheap."

The gross annual production is summarised in figure 1. Type 1
Three main coin types are found with the Qian Long title; the fastidious may like to distinguish several varieties within these types:

Type 1 is a good sized coin, with a broad rim (4mm approx), similar to those issued in Peking at the time, although the style of its obverse inscription is closer to that of Yunnan than Peking. The final stroke of gui is below the line of the hole. It is presumably based on the original pattern coin issued by the Board in the 8th year.

Type 2 has a normal size rim. The "feet" of bao are asymmetrically arranged, and the final stroke of gui is level with the hole. Type 3 has a square head on tong (as do the Peking coins from about 1760), and is often less well made than the first two types. It has some features in common with the type used by the central and eastern provinces.

Dimensions and quantities from the woefully small sample in my collection are: Qty % Diam (mm) زف‎ Weight (grams) oO

Type 1 25.3 0.5 4.1 0.1 Type 2 $$ $2 $$ 24.7 0.4 3.8 0.3 Type 3 24.7 0.2 4.1 0.3 Total

Stylistic grounds enables one to deduce the relative chronological order of the types, but the problem of an absolute chronology remains. If the sample were not so small, it would be possible to make an estimate of the date of introduction of the various types from the cumulative production, e.g. 59% of the production was of Types 1 and 2 which was achieved by about the 32nd year, so Type 3 was introduced about then. As it is, with a sample this size the accuracy would be about + 12 years.

There appears to have been a very precise control system operated by the Board of Revenue, with frequent changes of privy marks, during Qian Long, but nowhere have I been able to establish anything but indirect evidence for the dates of changes in coin types.

To obtain a larger sample size for this, and the other provincial mints, I would be interested to get in touch with other collectors who may have sizeable quantities of Qing cash. A recent purchase of 2,000 mixed cash yielded only 20 of the Guangxi mint, so clearly a pooling of resources would help. References: Guangxi tongzhi Vol. 178. Huangchao zhengdian leizuan Vol. 64.

# GUANGXI MINT - PRODUCTION DURING QIAN LONG

# 90 F

| ulative | 80 F | roduction % |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| be | 7OF | O |
| 5a | 50 b | 96,000 Strings |

## be 7OF O

## 5 a 50 b 96,000 Strings

## Ww 62,400 5

## 57,600 Strings - - 350 F O

## Annual Production / Al i \| / / فد‎ /

# fig. 4 YEAR OF REIGN

More ONS News There will be a meeting of the ONS American Region on Saturday 7 December 1991, 5-7pm, at the Drake Hotel, Room 1925 (440 Park Avenue at 56th Street, New York, NY 10022). The guest speakers will be William F. Spengler and Wayne G. Sayles on 'Turkoman Figural Coins and their iconography' They will also discuss their forthcoming book of the same title.