# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel, Mr. M. R. Broome,

UK & Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins, Newsletter Editor Mr. S. Goron, America: Mr. W. B. Warden, Jr.,

Annual Subscription £6.00; H. Fl. 25; FF 75; $$ $10. $$ h Asia: مم‎ karni NEWSLETTER 111 South Asia: Mr. -  - Kulkarni,

Regional Secretaries March - April 1988 General: Mr. G. P. Hennequin,

This month's ONS personality is Prashant Kulkarni, the recently appointed Regional Secretary for South Asia. Born in 1961, Prashant is a chartered accountant by profession and also spends a fair amount of time managing the family farm property in the neighbourhood of Nagpur. His collecting began with aquarium fish, then moved on to stamps, and then coins. Now he enjoys collecting anything old - antiques, paintings and other works of art. Numismatically, Prashant is interested in all Indian coinage from ancient to modern, while his collecting activity centres around the coins of the Moghal emperor, Jehangir, the Bhonslas, and the various sultanates. He also collects Indian princely state medals, seals, badges and weights. He is currently preparing for publication a book on the coinage of the Bhonsla rulers of Nagpur and has previously published some two dozen papers and articles on various Indian coins. He is a founder member and General Secretary of the Coin Society of Nagpur (150 members) and since his appointment as ONS Regional Secretary has been very active in recruiting members to the ONS and in making the society known to the growing number of South Asian collectors. ONS News

1.  At the meeting in London on 30 January, an auction raised £106 for ONS funds. Thanks are due to Spink and Son Ltd. for donating a number of coins for sale. Future London meetings will be held on Saturday 18 June and Saturday 5 November commencing at 14.15 at the British Museum Conservation Dept., 9 Montague Street, London WC\].

2.  Gilles Hennequin reports that a small ONS meeting took place in Hong Kong on 22 January at the house of Mr. J. R. Crawford. Also present were Messrs R. W. 5. Doo and A..لا‎ Rahman, as well as Gilles himself. Slides of Samanid and Saljuqid coins were shown as were Chinese coins from Mr. Crawford's collection. Thanks are due to Mr. and Mrs. Crawford for their very kind hospitality.

3.  Your Editor recently spent three weeks in India. During this period, on 23 and 24 January two ONS meetings were held in Calcutta, hosted most generously by Mr. R. L. Rampuria and Mr. G. S. Beed, respectively. Some 30 people attended each meeting. At the first meeting there were talks on the coins of the Sultans of Bengal and newly discovered ancient coins from Maharashtra given by myself and Mr. Kulkarni while the latter talked about some interesting Indo-Muslim coins at the Sunday meeting. It was very encouraging to note the growing interest in coin collecting in Calcutta. As well as the activities of the Calcutta ONS, there is also the Calcutta Numismatic Society whose membership is well into three figures (and to whom I also gave a talk on the coins of the Bengal Sultans) and the newly formed Coin Study Circle. Both these local societies have their own magazine, while the latter has not only produced two short reference booklets on the Bengal Sultans and an interesting booklet on Moghal coins but is also planning to produce a catalogue of the coins of the Sultans of Bengal. This last is an ambitious project and any ONS members with interesting or unusual coins of this series are invited to send details to the Editor together with photographs and/or rubbings. 4s nent Se

The Editor with (from 1. tor.) Mr. Parimal Roy, Mr. G. 3 Beed and Mr. R. L. Rampuria during a break at the ONS meeting in Calcutta on 23 January. --- --- Members' news & queries

1.  John Livieratos... has sent details of some Otto-man coins of Turkey in his collection which are either omitted or marked 'reported, not confirmed' in the Standard Catalog of World Coins (Krause Publications).

- Zeri Mah bub of Abdul Hamid I, year  1 1 87/12. 22mm, 2.6 grams, C70. ii.as above, year \]1 87/13. iii. Piastre of Selim III, year 1203/19. 34mm, 10.8 grams (worn and holed), C90a. iv. Darulhilafe Altin (Surre Altin) of Mahmud II, year 1223/ 17. 20mm, 1.5 grams, C22 1. v.Hayriye Altin of Mahmud II, year 1233/26. 21mm, 1.8 grams.

Mr. Livieratos would welcome any information or comments on the above coins, and any ONS members visiting Athens and interested in seeing the coins are invited to write to him or telephone him.

2.  Dr. Punshi of Bombay has a group of Macchlipatan copper coins weighing around 13 - 14 grams which depict two different dating systems:

yr 8 yr 16 yr 18 119\] yr 17 yr 19 yr 18 yr 20 yr 18 yr 21 yr 19 yr 21 yr 22 He would like to know if any member can explain the significance of this.

3.  Dilip Shah of Jabalpur has sent photographs of some 'Ek Pai Sikka' of the East India Company countermarked with what looks like a letter 'E'. Some coins have additional countermarks. These coins are found mainly in Seoni, a district about half-way between Jabalpur and Nagpur. Any interpretation of or information on the 'E' countermark would be welcome. S0 ‏4

# نه 86 قت

4.  Steve Album has taken up his.pen again. He has just completed an article on several southern Iraqi mints in the Umayyad province of Maysan, which will appear in 1989 in 'Museum Notes'. He has begun a series of articles on Islamic coins in general, which will be run in The Celator, a new monthly publication on ancient coins for the general collector (annual subscription: within USA $12 - third class mail; $18 - first class mail; to Canada $18; elsewhere $30 by air, from The Celator, P 0 Box 123, Lodi WI 53555). In addition, Steve has begun a project to reorganise the so-called ''post-reform Umayyad" coinage of some 35 mints in Syria and Palestine for eventual publication, and intends to finish off a general analysis of the Rasulid coinage of the Yemen. Last, but not least, we can expect a series of short articles for this Newsletter. We await the outcome of all this endeavour with keen anticipation. In the meantime, his price-list no. 54 has just been published.

5.  Mr. Mehrdad Sadigh, ONS no. 836, has recently opened a new gallery in New York City trading in Near Eastern, Islamic, Classical and Egyptian coins and antiquities. The gallery called Ancient Artifacts and Coins is situated at 303 Sth Avenue, Room 1515, New York, NY 10016.
6.  Colin Barron... has added traditional currency and exchange systems of the Pacific to his inter-ests and would welcome correspondence and exchange of information from members interested in the same area. He is also willing to sell specimens of traditional currency from PNG.

7.  Mr. Aman Ur Rahman,..., is studying the coinage of the Moghal emperors Babur and Humayun with a view to writing a monograph on the subject. He invites members to provide photographs and other details of coins in their collections. Other News

1.  A tentative programme has now been produced for the Paul Balog Conference on Islamic Numismatics, Weights and related subjects due to take place in Jerusalem on 17-19 October 1988:

- Bacharach - Ikhshidid coins - R. Broome - Questions raised by the new 'Dirhem' coinages of the late sixth century of the Hijra - Curtis - Local coinage of the Ayyubid subjugation of the Turkmen Atabegs in Syria and Asia - Hisch - Changes of types and the emission system of the Syrian copper coinage of the 8th century/14th century AD. - Meshorer - The Islamic coinage of Jerusalem - D. Nicol - Islamic coinage in imitation of Fatimid types - Qedar - Umayyad copper coinage of Syria Further details from the Conference Secretariat, Paul Balog Comference, Te'um, P O B 4426, Jerusalem 91044, Israel.

2.  The American Numismatic Society is undertaking a campaign to raise $4 million for endowment, capital improvements and further computerisation of operations. New & Recent Publications

1.  Translation of Al-Tabari's History. Many collectors and students of early Islamic coinage would like to be able to consult the medieval Arabic histories for background on the coins, but cannot because they don't have access to the libraries that have these books, or because they don't know Arabic. Now both these problems are being solved in part with a new English translation of al-Tabari's Ta'rikh al-rusul wa'l-muluk (History of the Prophets and Kings), an enormous history of the pre-

Islamic and Islamic periods down to AD 915. The translation will be published in 38 volumes, in hard-cover and in paperback. It is not finished, but many volumes have already been published. The volumes can be purchased separately.

For more information, write to the publisher: State University of New York Press, State University Plaza, Albany, NY 12246, USA. The books can be purchased directly from the publisher, or from booksellers.

Some comments about this work may be useful for those who don't know it. Al-Tabari's history is the most important early Arabic history of the Umayyad and Abbasid caliphates, but it is not the only history. After looking at Tabari, it is still necessary to use modern histories of the period that provide additional information and interpretation. A lot of useful books have been published recently on various aspects of the history of the caliphate.

Tabari's History is not a ''source"' except for his lifetime, and even then only for events where he was present. In general, Tabari gives a citation for each report giving the original source of the report. The source may be an eyewitness, or

someone who was alive at the time and heard about the event, or someone later who had an opinion about it. It's important to recognize the nature of the original report in each case - and to try to understand the reasons why the original reporter may have been biased or incorrectly informed.

The History is interesting reading even without a specific research need. It gives a good picture of the history of early Islam as seen by a very learned man of the time. Anyone who wants to do research on Umayyad or 'Abbasid coins should buy the relevant volumes of al-Tabari's History. (MLB)

2.  Spink Numismatic Circular for February 1988 contains part 7 of O. D. Cresswell's 'The Bullet Coinage of Siam'. The March issue includes an article by Samuel Lachman entitled 'The Period of the Early Qasimid Imams of the Yemen 1006-

1054H/1597-1644', an article by Robert P. Puddester on Indian Title Badges, and a review of the latter's recent book on British India Historical Medals etc. (mentioned in an earlier Newsletter).

3.  Dr. Kinzelbach has published Niitzel's 1891 Minzen der Rasuliden with a complete translation into English. It can be obtained from..., West Germany. The price is DM68 including postage within the EEC.

4.  '""Chopmarks" by F. M. Rose, Dallas 1987, VI + S4pp, illustrated, card covers. Available from Spink & Son Ltd (5, 6,7 King Street, St. James's, London SW1Y 6QS, UK) for £8 plus £1 postage & packing. This is an attempt to analyse and discuss the difficult subject of Chinese chopmarks. The author traces the background and history of chopmarks, and defines and illustrates the various types. He provides guidance on the comparative scarcity of the different host coins that bear the chopmarks and a brief treatment of selected chopmarks and their meaning. A separate chapter discusses East Indian shroff marks. Indian Punchmarked Forgeries - Terry Hardaker

ONS members interested in punchmarked coins may wish to note that a batch of forgeries has recently appeared in the market. They are believed to originate from two Delhi dealers neither of whom was aware that they were forgeries. The coins seen so far are of silver and copper, large, and easy to spot if you are experienced but they could easily deceive the nonspecialist. Both metals have been darkly toned and pitted with encrustations.

The coppers are large rectangular (about 20 x 30mm) and the silver are either very large saucer-shaped coins similar to the earliest Gangetic punchmarked coins or slightly smaller, but still roundish and saucer-shaped, similar in size to Magadha Series I coins (about 32 x 25mm). silver copper

The coins may be recognised as forgeries from the following characteristics:

1.  Whereas genuine coins always have a fixed number of official marks, usually five, on one side (apart from any added bankers marks, which are usually smaller and may occur on either side), these coins have a variable number of marks, often repeating the same mark several times.
a The forger has only made one punch for each design, so when you see the same mark repeated on the same coin or on another coin it is always from the same punch.

3.  Some marks are repoussé, i.e. the design is intaglio. This technique is not used on genuine coins. (The palm-tree symbol on the copper piece illustrated is like this).

4.  Although only more advanced students will be able to detect it, the forger has mixed very early and very late marks on the same coin, e.g. marks from Magadha Series I and Series VI.

5.  He has also used a number of designs not known at all on genuine coins.

The collector has so far enjoyed the double bonus of low prices and (presumably for this reason) no counterfeits in the mainstream of punchmarked coins. Hitherto the forger has confined his activities to the bent bars, plus the one notorious gold punchmarked coin purporting to be of the ancient period, which appeared some time ago in the JNSI. This coin was widely agreed to be a fake. Let us hope the present batch is an isolated instance and that all dealers will be vigilant. It should also be said that in the last few years some quite spectacular genuine punchmarked coins of completely new types have come to light as well; many of these are yet unpublished. If dealers or collectors are in any doubt about punchmarked coins they are offered, I am always glad to offer what advice I can. An Unusual Durrani Copper Coin

Copper coins of the Durrani Shahs from the mint of Peshawar do not appear to be very common. Whitehead!, under the heading of this mint, lists the following:

Ahmad Shah........ 1 Taimur Shah........ 7 Mahmud (2nd reign)...1 Aiyub Shah......... 2 Valentine? illustrates two of Ahmad Shah, two of Taimur Shah, one of Mahmud Shah and eleven of Aiyub Shah. There are probably more copper coins of Peshawar in other museums but generally they are not met with as frequently as other Durrani coins.

The following piece is of an unusual type and, as far as I know, is unpublished.

# CCI AE Weight: 11.3 grams. Diameter: 21-23 mm.

Obv. An ornamental umbrella standing on a tablet which contains the date (1226). On the right is inscribed 190% and on the left Ci. ce Dotted circle around.

## Rev. ب

إبشاور‎ YY ولوس‎ in octagon within dotted circle. This reverse is similar to that of the rupees of Shah Shuja (KM.724) and Mahmud Shah (KM.727).

From the date on the coin it would appear to be an issue of Mahmud Shah (2nd reign). AH 1224-1233 (AD 1809-1818), although it does not bear his name as his other known copper coin does.

The history of Peshawar is somewhat vague about this period. According to Whitehead... "Mahmud Shah recovered Kabul in the spring of 1809 and defeated Shah Shuja at Nimla in August of that year, AH 1224. Shuja fled to Qandahar, then to the Punjab, where he met Ranjit Singh at Sahiwal. The next few years were occupied with various attempts at Peshawar. In the cold weather of AD 1811-1812 (AH 1227) Shuja expelled the Governor, Muhammad Azim Khan Barakzai, from Pesha-

war and took up his residence in the citadel..."'

From the foregoing it appears that in AH 1226 Peshawar was controlled by a Governor of Mahmud Shah, who issued his own copper coins.

1. Whitehead, R.B. Catalogue of the Coins in the Punjab Museum Lahore. Vol. Ill (Oxford, 1934). 2. Valentine, W.H. The Copper Coins of India. Part Il. The Panjab & Contiguous Native States. London, 1914.

Five Umayyad Dirhems not in Walker! - Tawfig Ibrahim

Since Walker first published his excellent corpus, many new dates and a few mints have been discovered. Due to the varied and dispersed nature of the new additions the most expedient method as regards the following coins was to consult Dr. Michael L. Bates, who generously obliged, with the more up-to-date information available in his files.

## 1. AT BIHAR اه يهر‎ 79H 2.90g. 25.5mm

Distribution of legends similar to Walker Kh.4, but in reverse field, '9 " at beginning of third line.

Could be mistaken for a new mint name, but Dr. Bates argues convincingly in a forthcoming article "Mystery Mints of the Umayyads" that this is just bi-Harat written partly backwards. He furthermore suggests in the light of this that the dirhem published by Curiel (BN 1976.474) as HZ is just another anomalous issue of Harat and should read instead HR. The only other known issue for Harat 79H, and this one without error, is given as ANS 1977.253.3.
2. ARMINIYYA  82H 2.85g. 26mm. Distribution of legend similar to Walker Kh.4. Of note is the omission of one of the letters in the mint name, which is

## written as Annoy). -.- Seems to be unrecorded.

3. ARMINIYYA  110H 2.90g. 25.5mm. Distribution of legend as previous coin. Seems to be unrecorded.

4. IFRIQIYYA  119H 2.99g. 27mm. Distribution of legend as previous coin.

Two other specimens known, ANS 1977.253.24 (ANS annual report 1977 but not illustrated), and one other in private collection.

5. SUQ al-AHWAZ  83H 2.88g. 25.5mm. Distribution of legend similar to coin 1.

Only one other specimen known but not published = ANS 1952.80.6.

Abbreviations: ANS American Numismatic Society BN Bibliothéque Nationale 1. Walker - John Walker, A Catalogue of Arabic-Byzantine and Post-reform Umayad Coins (London, 1956). A Puzzling Gold Coin - Raymond J. Hébert

The gold coin illustrated below was offered to the National Numismatic Collections of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. recently by a resident from Kabul, Afghanistan. The piece weighs 10.816 grams (tanka) and is mintless, but dated 828 = AD 23 November 1424 - November 13, 1425. Ara

The obverse translates as "'the supreme sovereign father of the victor the sublimity of the world'', and on the reverse, "'and

religion Mahmitd Shah al-Khalji may God perpetuate his sovereignty 828"'. This Mahmiid Shah seems to be Mahmid I Khalji of Malwa (840-873=AD 1436-1468) of whom we are told by H. Nel-

son Wright (Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum Calcutta, Oxford 1907) that he usurped the throne of his master, Muhammad I Ghori (838-839=AD 1435-1436). The ruler of Malwa in 828 was Hoshang Shah Ghori (808-836=AD 1405-

1432). Can we suppose that the 2=P of the date is actually a 4- "ل‎?
According to Wright, the weight of the gold coins of this series ''varies little throughout the series, ranging from 172 grains (=1 1.1454 grams) to 164 grains (=10.627 grams)', so that the weight of our piece is appropriate for the series.

Yet, the fabric of the piece, the epigraphy, the cartouche, and the inappropriate date makes one wonder if this is not a modern fabrication. Since the coins of India of this period are not my forte, can someone of the readership let me know if they have seen similar pieces, and if the piece is indeed a fabrication. Nicholas Lowick Memorial Fund

The Royal Numismatic Society invites applications for grants from the above fund. This fund was set up by the Society as a permanent memorial to its former Fellow and Officer Nicholas Lowick, curator of Oriental Coins in the British Museum

1962 to 1986. Nicholas was not only a leading international authority in his field, but is also remembered with affection as

a generous friend to all interested in Oriental Coins, scholars, enthusiasts, collectors and dealers alike.

Commencing next year the Society proposes to make annual awards from the Fund to promote the study of the subject to which Nicholas devoted his career. The first awards from the Fund will be of one or two grants of £250 each towards travel and accommodation costs to enable the successful applicant(s) to study some aspects of Oriental Numismatics.

Applications should be made in writing by the 1st of May, 1988. For further details those wishing to apply should write to the Honorary Secretary of the Society, c/o Department of Coins and Medals, British Museum, London WC1B 3DG. Donations to the Fund are still welcome and should be sent to the same address. Cheques should be made payable to the Nicholas Lowick Memorial Fund. Porcelain Chinese-Siamese Pee Tokens "Ramsden and the 1/16 of a song-pei"'

An essay to rectify the wrong conclusions of Ramsden after 75 years- Part 2 \_ By G. Hollink Ramsden and the 1/16 song-pei

In his Siamese porcelain and other tokens, Ramsden names the values set out below as 1/16 song-pei, or a derivative of 1/16 song-pei, though not a single item actually represented this value. Numbers that are mentioned, are according to Ramsden's description: A 4. Chinese Ch'ien, abbreviation for $e, used for salung. Nos: 101, 104, 105, 133, 135, 143, 144, 190, 193, 233, 277, 284, 312, 319.

B Chinese Fen, used for the Siamese hun = 1/5 fuang. Nos. of the derivatives: EL FF 17, 292, 293.

# Ie FF 18, 19, 66. EK F 197. C Siamese for 100 (pa) = 1 att: no. 235.

## D No. 132 No. 139 6

These four categories are discussed in the following paragraphs.

# A

In the catalogue of the numismatic collection of the Batavian Society for Arts and Sciences, Batavia 1896, Van der Chijs

describes this character on page 139, as the abbreviated character for Ch'ien - salung. Ramsden (1911) as a numismatist and a publisher ought to have known this. Had he done so, much would have become clear

to him. Schlegel, too, interpreted this character the wrong way, as Ie Yao (tender, fresh). There is thus no difference in opinion at all between Schlegel and Ramsden, with regard to Ramsden's no. 101.

# B

3\} Fen is the Chinese word for 'to divide'. It is used for the partition of a fuang into 5 hun. Schlegel mentions it in his work on page 241. In spite of the fact that Ramsden often cited Schlegel, he did not use this value-rate, or perhaps he did not notice it. Thus he is the cause of the strange values one can find even today in sales lists of pee coins. What Ramsden named 5 - 1/16 song-pei, 2% - 1/16 song-pei, 12% - 1/16 song-pei, are in reality 5 hun (fuang), 2% hun (song-pei), and 1.25 hun (pai), respectively. I have depicted below (fig.3) a well-known set of tokens, with the portrait of Queen Victoria that bear these values on the reverse. The items illustrated at fig. 4 comprise 3 sets with salung, fuang, and song-pei, that show the various notations for song-pei. Whether 1K means 2% or 25 is not relevant, because 2% (hun) and 25 (wen) are both song-pei. In other cases though, 25 has been written \|\[t& (2x10+5) or زا‎ 7 (2%x10). Figure 3: variants of the value 1/16 song-pei

5 hun = fuang 2% hun = song-pei 1.25 hun = pai
Figure 4: 3 sets, showing various notations of the value song-pei. 2% (hun) or 25 (wen) = song-pei

# C

is Siamese for 100 (75 = 200). Since the porcelain coinage was meant to fill the gap between a convenient, recognizable amount of cowrie-shells (a handfull,

25 pieces = 1/16 song-pei), and the salung, I think the Siamese inscriptions showing numbers without unit represent cowries a pa (pa-tse = cowrie). This assumption is supported by the size of the pee coins in question. Hence 98 will be 100 pa or att. The Chinese-Siamese tokens without unit are mostly in wen. Some items only have numbers on them, like 25 = 25 wen (see fig.1); or 5, meaning 5 hun = fuang (Chalerm Yongboonkird), as in fig. 5, below.

## Figure 5. y) ممم

# D

Numbers 132 and 139 concern 2 pee tokens with the inscription of the Hong "Yung - Sheng" on the obverse and on the reverse a chakra with the value-inscription, both in Siamese and Chinese, in the centre. The circular field is divided in two, by a vertical stroke, reminiscent of the cross-like symbol in the Siamese for 45 salung, and St fuang.

No. 132 obverse: Yung - Sheng Li - Chi No. 139 obverse: Yung - Sheng reverse: Ch'ien Salung reverse: Fuang Fang

# SEY

It is worth noting that there are other pee tokens of the '"'Yung-Sheng"' type bearing similar inscriptions on the reverse, that are not mentioned in Ramsden. Conclusion

I believe I have now satisfactorily solved the enigma of the 1/16 song-pei coins created by Ramsden. It is a pity that his modern successors Hofrichter and Petit made the same mistakes by citing him. It is clear that quoting sources uncritically can lead to the perpetuation of errors, especially when the relevant inscriptions have not been properly studied. In the present case the combined efforts of a Chinese linguist and a numismatist have been needed to clarify the position.

N.B. It was the lack of good material on this subject that urged me to do a study of pee coins. I hope it will result in a catalogue of these wonderful objects. I currently have descriptions with figures of over 2000 different pee coins; 3500 at least will be my ambition. Any collectors who think they can contribute with descriptions, articles, photographs, or xerox-copies of pee coins, are kindly invited to write to me. Mr. G. Hollink,

Galataprint, Park House, Albert Road, Wolverhampton, WV6 OAG, U.K.