# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel, Mr. M. R. Broome, ١ UK & Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins,

Newsletter Editor America: Mr. W. 8. Warden, Jr., Mr. S. Goron, South Asia: Mr. P. P. Kulkarni, Annual Subscription £6.00; H. Fl. 25; FF 75; NEWSLETTER No. 124 Regional Secretaries

General: Mr. G. P. Hennequin, 3 May - June 1990 ONS News

As mentioned in Newsletter 123, the first ONS Congress will take place in collaboration with the Indian Coin Society in Nagpur, India from 27 October - 2 November 1990. The provisional programme is: 27 October - Inauguration; 28 - 29 October - formal sessions; 30 October - sightseeing; 3 1 October - 1 November - formal sessions; 2 November - closing ceremony. The aim at this stage is to have three categories of papers: Ancient India & Orient; Islamic World and Muslim India;

Modern oriental coins, bank-notes and medals. Parallel sessions may be held depending on the number of papers to be read. Any member interested in presenting a paper on any oriental topic should write to Mr. Kulkarni, ONS Regional Secretary for South Asia, with the title by 31 July 1990 and with a short summary by 31 August 1990. Accommodation can be provided for participants. A full programme will be published in due course and the proceedings of the Congress will also be published. It is planned to hold a dealers' bourse and/or auctions at a different venue during the Congress and there will also

be exhibits of Indian coins. For tourism and other details members can contact Dilip Rajgor, 7 Sonal Darshan, Goshala Road, Mulund, Bombay, 400 080, India.

2.  The next ONS méeting in London will take place on Saturday 10 November 1990 at 9 Montague Street, London WC1, commencing at 2.15 pm. There will be the usual annual auction and possibly a talk.

-  There will be an ONS meeting in Leiden (Holland) on Saturday 27 October 1990 in the Museum van Oudheden (Archaeological Museum), Rapenburg 28, commencing 1 1 A Message from the Membership Secretary

Would all Regional Secretaries writing with membership information on changes of address and/or interests etc. please quote

first the membership number of each member they are referring to, in addition to the name. This will certainly cut down a good deal of research time, time which I can no longer afford. Some of you do this already but unfortunately some do not.

Visiting London recently Prashant Kulkarni and Dilip Shah from India outlined their plans for the October Numismatic Convention they plan to hold in Nagpur. There is already ample support in the South Asian Region and the organisers are hoping for keen support from ONS members worldwide. In due course they hope to circulate all members with details of the itinerary and programme of papers to be read etc. Our Indian members have recently done much to recruit new members for

the ONS and hopefully our membership worldwide will do their best to support their efforts by trying to attend the Conven- tion.

Sadly I have to report that due to increasing pressure of professional work I have to give up my term as Membership Secretary of the ONS, at least by the end of the current year. If any member wishes to take over the position as membership secretary would they please write to Michael Broome and inform him of their availability to perform this task. I have enjoyed my term in office and have watched the membership grow and I am sorry not to be able to continue. However, all good things must come to an end and I hope someone amongst you will take on the task and enjoy it as much as I have.

Best wishes to you all and have a good summer. M.J.L. Members News

1...Nas recently suffered the misfortune of having his whole collection of oriental coins stolen. The collection includes coins of the Indo-Greeks, Indo-Scythians, Indo-Parthians, Kushans, Yueh-Chi, Arsacids and Sasanians. Rarities include MAC 345, 354, 355, 359, 360; Indo-Greek MAC 1706 with loop; Sogdiana tetradrachm MAC 1856 with damage to rim; Sarmatians - 16 items MAC 337 & 338; Indo-Scythian tetradrachm MAC 2369 (this coin); IIkhans - Abu Sa'id 28 kirat (gold); Sacarauci - MAC 767 & 779. Any member offered such coins which may have originated from this source should inform Mr. Coenen and/or appropriate authorities.

2...1S interested in purchasing a wide range of books on Islamic numismatics and particularly any publications relating to Egypt and Palestine areas. A copy of Mayer is eagerly sought.

3....a new member reported in this Newsletter with an American APO address, informs us that he isactually stationed and living in Japan and welcomes letters from fellow members who are interested in acquiring or trading material from that part of the world.

4...has moved from his Baltimore address and American Regional Secretary Bill Warden Jr. would like urgently to contact him. He asks if any other member knows of the new address for Mr. Bouterse, would they please be kind enough to let Bill Warden have it.

4.  We regret to report the sad death in Hong Kong of Mr. J. R. Crawford on January 27th 1990. --- Other News

1. MINTEX 90 Earlier this year, the Indian Coin Society organised an exhibition of coins and currency notes and other forms of monetary instruments on a hitherto unprecedented scale in India. The inaugural function was held at Vasantarao Deshpande hall on 28th January at 6.30 pm. Prashant Kulkarni, Chief Executive of Mintex

90, welcomed the participants numbering over two hundred and gave the history of the Indian Coin Society. The exhibition was inaugurated by Mr. Jan Lingen, President of the Dutch Royal Numismatic Society, by the lighting of the traditional lamp and an inaugural address.

On this occasion Professor Ajay Mitra Shastri, Chairman of the Indian Coin Society & Head of the Department of Ancient Indian History Culture & Archaeology, Nagpur University, was honoured by the presentation of a felicitation volume containing contributions from some eighty scholars of India and abroad. Shri Devendra Handa, Chairman of the Department of Ancient Indian History Culture & Archaeology, Punjab University, Chandigarh, who edited the volume, narrated its history and pointed out that right until the last moment, a number of scholars had been anxious to contribute to it. Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, member of the Executive Council of the Nagpur University said that Nagpur University should be proud of the reputation that Prof. Shastri had brought to it by his well-known contributions in the academic field. Dr. S. V. Arya, former Vice-Chancellor of Jawaharlal Nehru Agricultural University, Jabalpur and Dr. I. K. Sarma, Director of the Archaeological Survey of India

also highlighted the achievements of Prof. Shastri in the field of Indian numismatics. The volume was presented by Dr. V. B. Kolte, former Vice-Chancellor

of the Nagpur University who said that Prof. Shastri was carrying forward in a most befitting manner the scholarly traditions set by the late Prof. V. V. Mirashi and that he was one of the greatest living epigraphists. He pointed out how some

of his own interpretations of inscriptions of the Vakatakas had been corrected by Prof. Shastri. Jan Lingen lighting the inaugural lamp at Mintex 90

Dr. John S. Deyell, the well-known, if incommunicative, student of Indian numismatics added his congratulations to Prof. Shastri and the organisers of Mintex 90.

In his reply to the felicitations, Prof. Shastri re-dedicated himself to continuing his academic work in the best possible manner and stressed the value of co-operation between numismatists and coin collectors. He recollected the beginnings of the

society and the important role played in its foundation by Dr. Chandrashekhar Gupta, Prashant Kulkarni and Raghunath Sanghi and highlighted the role played by the Society in furthering numismatic interest, which in turn resulted in the

discovery of the Mitra & Bhandra coins which bridge the gap between the Mauryas and the Satavahanas in the history of the Deccan. The programme concluded with a vote of Thanks by Dr. Chandrashekhar Gupta, Vice-Chairman of the society.

In the concluding function held on 30th Jan. the first issue of the Society's journal, 'Nidhi', was released. Certificates were distributed to the participants in the exhibition and medals for the best entries were awarded. The Gold Medal was

awarded to Mr. Raghuvir Pai of Bombay for his exhibit on 'The Maratha Coinage'.

A seminar on Deccan numismatics was also held and a number of informative papers were presented by scholars includ- ing Dr. Shobhana Gokhale & Dr. I. K. Sarma.

The three day exhibition was very popular. Thousands of visitors includingstudents from schools and colleges came to the exhibition.

a The fourth Tibingen conference on Oriental numismatics was held April 28-29 1990. It attracted 30-35 participants

from both German states, Switzerland, Austria, Sweden, France, Turkey and the USA, making it the best-attended of all four gatherings since 1987.

The conference opened with a eulogy upon the recently-deceased C. Olcer by his old friend H. Wilski, after which seven papers were read on a range of topics of Arab-moslem numismatics (from dirhams in Viking-age hoards to Ottoman imitations). One participant from East Berlin elaborated on the current situation of Indian numismatics in the '""Noch-DDR". Last but not least, information on the prospects for research in Oriental numismatics at Tubingen, after the Album purchase, was

provided by Steve Album himself, and by the newly-appointed keeper, L. Ilisch.

The next conference has already been set for April 27-28, 1991. Thanks are due to Claus Pelling and Lutz Ilisch, responsible for the technical and scientific arrangements respectively. GPH --- New & Recent Publications

-  As mentioned above, the first issue of 'Nidhi' was published in January by the Indian Coin Society under the editorship of Prof. A. M. Shastri. Volume 1 contains the following articles:

'Copper punch-marked coins from Gujerat: an interesting phase in the punch-marked coinage' by Dilip Rajgor 'Mitra & Bhada coins from Vidarbha' by Ajay Mitra Shastri and Chandrashekhar Gupta 'The first ever reported lead portrait coins of the Satavahanas' by Amarendra Nath 'The antiquity of Rama-Tankas' by Devendra Handa

'Fresh light on Islambandar urf Rajapur issue' by Ahsan Ibrahim Chowhan 'The Nagpur mint and its Bhonsla silver coinage' by Prashant Kulkarni 'An interesting Islamic token' by Lalman This publication costs Rs 50 or £2 and will appear once a year.

2.  The Indian Coin Society has also produced its first Newsletter (April 1990). This includes an item on new coins of Chhimuka Satavahana by Prashant Kulkarni and an illustration of a strange rupee in the name of Aurangzeb but with unread mint.

3.  The Calcutta Coin Study Circle's publication no. 1 for 1990 has also appeared. This includes part 2 of 'The Coins of the Sultans of Bengal' by your Editor, information on the coins of Shivaji Maharaja by P. Kulkarni, Tavernier's account of NorthEast Indian coins by N. G. Rhodes, as well as many photographs.

4.  The proceedings of the 10th International Congress of Numismatics, London 1986 has just been published. Available for SFr 200 from A © van der Dussen b.v., Hondstraat 5, 6211 HW Maastricht, Netherlands.

World Coin News for 14 May 1990 contains an illustrated listing of Annamese silver coinage by Colin R Bruce II.

6.  Rajesh Jain & Co. (201 Bhupindera Office Complex, 59 Rani Jhansi Road, New Delhi 110 055, India) has published a list of some 600 titles on Indian numismatics, history, archaeology and language dictionaries.

7.  Steve Album has published his list number 65.

8.  A list has also been received from Barber & Fox Ltd., 328 Star Road, Eastsound, Orcas Island, WA 98245-3 280, USA). This contains inter alia a range of far eastern coins while their next list is due to feature Burmese opium weights and scales,

and a collection of rarer Siamese gaming tokens.

9.  Robert Tye has published his list no. 21. This includes a challenging article entitled '"'Coins in the service of research: The D-set'' (denomination set). --- Auction News

Scott Semans (P. 0. Box 22849, Seattle, WA 98122) is to hold his first major auction on 25 August 1990 in Seattle during the ANA Convention. The nucleus will consist of the Daniel K. E. Ching collection of Chinese and far eastern coins. A deluxe catalogue of about 2000 lots is planned even though the majority of the material is in the under $200 range. Extensive numismatic and historical notes will be included. Selected lots will be on view at Hong Kong, Tokyo and Vancouver shows prior to the auction and regular viewing will take place at Semans's ANA bourse table.

$$ = $$ The Nelson Bunker Hunt collection of Islamic coins is due to be auctioned by Sotheby's in London Spring 1991.

3.  Spink Taisei (Ziirich) will be holding an auction of Coins of the Islamic world on Tuesday 19 June 1990 at the Dolder Grand Hotel, Kurhausstrasse 65, Ziirich, Switzerland. The auction comprises 412 lots including a fine range of coins of the Yemen (eg Ziyadids, Rassids, Ayyubids, Rasulids, Ottomans). Of particular note are dirhems from the mints of Barash, Muda' and Hisn Jahili. There is also an Ayyubid-Rasulid dirhem of 'Adan 644, which shows that Ayyubid influence in the Yemen had a resurgence twenty years after the last Ayyubid prince had left the country. Further details from Spink Taisei Numismatics Ltd, Lowenstrasse 65, 8001 Ziirich, Switzerland (Auction 34).

4. The September auction by Miinzzentrum, Rubenstrasse 42, 5000 Kéln 1, West Germany, is due to include a fine collection of Indian State copper coins.

The Early Islamic Coinage of Hims: A newtype by W. A. Oddy

The seventh century coinage of Syria is well known from the pages of Walker, whose magisterial survey of the subject, although now rather dated and incomplete, is an essential starting point for further work.! One possible direction for further study has been indicated by Bates who stressed the importance of studying the early Islamic coinage from the point of view of geographic distribution (i.e. by mint and region) rather than by type.?

Although it cannot be said that there has been a rush to follow Bates' advice by the publication of in-depth studies of individual mints, the pre-reform coinage of Hims has been studied by Ilisch.2 More recently, his arrangement of the coinage has itself been subject to a revision following the discovery of three specimens of a new variety of the ''Constans II'' bust type which has only a Greek legend on the obverse, but Greek and Arabic legends on the reverse\* (nos. 2 and 3 below).

Now a fourth specimen of the ''Greek only'' obverse type has come to light in a private collection (no. 4 below) which is not only die-linked on the reverse with one of the other specimens, but which is clearly the latest of the four coins. This position is decided by the style of the bust on the obverse and by the vertical arrangement of the lettering, which are both nearer to the obverses of the much more common "'Constans II' type (no. 5 below). It is thus possible to arrange these coins in the following chronological sequence, starting with an example of the preceeding "'standing emperor'' type (no. 1 below).

# &

The weights and die axes are: (1) 3.56g, 5.00; (2) 2.52g, 7.00; (3) 3.61g, 11.00; (4) 3.99g, 3.00; (5) 3.26g, 7.00.

All the coins are in various private collections. Nos. (2) and (3) are published in ref. 4, where they are nos. 3.1.2 and 3.1.1 respectively. The important features of the individual coins are as follows:

1.  On the obverse the word KAAON to the right of the '"'emperor'' reads upwards, with the letters arranged partly horizontally and partly vertically. (This is clearer on other better preserved specimens). On the reverse the mint is written EMH CIC.

On the obverse the word KAAON reads clockwise, with the letters arranged partly horizontally and partly vertically. On the reverse the mint is written €MH CIC. (This is clear from a die duplicate in the American Numismatic Society, inv. no. 1972.101.3.)

3.  This has the same obverse die as no. 2, but on the reverse the mint is written €MI CHC.

This is the newly discovered coin on which the word KAAON reads downwards on either side of the bust (rather than clockwise) with the letters arranged vertically. The reverse has the same die as no. 3. The rearranged obverse legend links this coin with the more common '"'Constans II"' variety (no. 5), as does the spelling of the mint name on the reverse.

> On the obverse the word KAAON reads downwards to the left of the bust with the letters arranged vertically. There is a kufic inscription on the right. On the reverse the mint is written EMI CHC. '

1.  J, Walker, A Catalogue of the Arab-Byzantine and Post-Reform Umaiyad Coins, British Museum, London, 1956. 2. M. L. Bates, The ''Arab-Byzantine" bronze coinage of Syria: an innovation by 'Abd al-Malik, in A Colloquium in Memory of George Carpenter Miles (1904-1975), American Numismatic Society, New York, 1976, pp.16-28.

3. L. Ilisch, Die umayyadischen und 'abbasidischen Kupfermiinzen von Hims: Versuch einer Chronologie, Miinstersche Numismatische Zeitung,

10 (3), (1980), pp.23-30. 4. W. A. Oddy, The "Constans II'' bust type of Arab-Byzantine coins of Hims, Revue Numismatique, 6th series, 29 (1987), pp.192-197.
The important features of the greek inscriptions are shown on the following diagrams:

# es

# لدت"‎ cy

# \|

# Cole)

# \|

# 59 9

# onlay

Note on a Silver Portrait Coin of Yajna Satakarni by Ajay Mitra Shastri

Dilip Shah has published an interesting silver portrait coin of the Satavahana king Yajna Satakarni who ruled in the 2nd century A.D. over the Deccan.! It differs from the usual silver portrait coins of this ruler in respect of the delineation of the royal portrait which definitely shows Roman impact and is indicative of the close commercial contact between the Deccan and the Roman empire during the period, a fact known from literary and other numismatic sources.

However, the reverse legend, which is in a Dravidian language," has not been read correctly. The word following Arahanaku (of king) is not Gotamimakanaku, but Gotamiputaku, both meaning 'of son of Gotami'. While the expression makan

was used in the sense of son on all the portrait coins of Vasishthiputra Pulumavi, Vasishthiputra Sivasri Pulumavi, Vasisthiputra Satakarni and Vasishthiputra Skanda Satakarni, we have instead puta on the coins of the succeeding rulers Yajna Satakarni and Vijaya Satakarni, which has the same meaning, viz. son. There appears to have been a deliberate effort towards Prakritisation (or Brahmanisation) during the time of Yajna Satakarni as indicated by his name meaning 'sacrifice' as well as his portraiture on some other portrait coins.3 The partial abandonment of the Dravidian language and its replacement by the usual Prakrit appears to have been dictated by political needs as the Dravidian legend on the reverse of silver portrait coins was deliberately adopted in order to announce the re-occupation of the eastern Deccan and consolidation of their power in the newly conquered territory and after four reigns when the region was completely integrated with the rest of the empire it could be gradually dropped. This process began during the reign of Yajna, but when it came to an end is not known for want of necessary evidence.

1. ONS Newsletter, No. 118, May-June 1989. 2. Ajay Mitra Shastri, 'Pre-Satavahana and Satavahana Coinage of the Deccan', Presidential Address, JNSI, vol. 44, pp.1-16. 3. I. K. Sarma, Coinage of the Satavahana Empire, Delhi, 1980, pl. XVII, pp.14-18.

Recent Indian Fabrications of Rajasthani Coins by H. Herrli

During the last two years a growing number of fakes and fabrications of old Rajasthani silver and copper coins have been

found with certain dealers in Delhi and may possibly be found also with jewellers, antique dealers and the like in other parts of India.

Most of these fabrications are based on the illustrations in W. W. Webb's book "The Currencies of the Hindu States of Rajputana"' (London, 1893) of which reprints exist.

The silver used for these false coins looks rather dark and may contain quite a high proportion of copper. They all appear to be hand-struck.

The following list illustrates the fabrications and forgeries known to the writer but possibly others exist. 1. AR 1/4 rupee, 2.92  2. AR 1/8 rupee, 1.4g

1 and 2 are mules resembling Nazarana coins. Obverse: the design of the reverse of the accession coin of Ratan Singh (Webb: plate VI, 3) Reverse: the reverse of the Nazarana rupee in the names of Queen Victoria and Sardar Singh (Webb: plate VI, 6) Bikaner 3. AR Nazarana rupee, 11.5g, 1859/VS.1916

This rupee is a copy of a coin of Dunga Singh, derived from Webb (plate VI, nos. 6 & 9)

\[Editor's note: There is some divergence of opinion about this coin. P P Kulkarni has seen it and believes it to be genuine. \] --- Bhilwara (Mewar) 4. AR "Double rupee"', 22.7¢.

This "'double rupee" is a fictitious coin based on a set of dies used for the striking of '"'New Bhilwara Paisas" (Webb: plate II, 11). The diameter of the coin has been reduced to 82.5% of the size of Webb's dies. 5. AR Nazarana rupee, 11.05g, AH 1216/46 Dholpur

This fake coin has been copied from Webb: plate XII, 11. Jaipur

6. AR Square Nazarana rupee, 11.35g, AD1858/RY 23  7. AR Nazarana % rupee, 5.85g, AD 1858/ RY 23

8. AR Square Nazarana % Rupee, 2.75g, AD1858/ RY 23  9. CU Nazarana Paisa, 17.1g, AD 1858/ RY 23

Nos. 6 to 9 were all struck from the same pair of dies. Obverse: The Queen Victoria inscription of the Jaipuri rupees. Reverse: The Ram Singh inscription of the Jaipuri rupees but with ''sanah 23"' below the ''jhar''. AD 1858/ RY 23 seems to be the first year in which all the current denominations were struck in the names of Queen Victoria and Maharaja Ram Singh at Jaipur. In this case the fakes introduce nonexistent varieties and forms of a genuinely existing coin type.

10. CU Nazarana Paisa, 6.85 - 8.3g, AD 1909/ 30

Copper coins of type 10, which are quite common, show the design of the Nazarana rupees in the names of Queen Victoria and Maharaja Madho Singh of Jaipur. The coins seem to have only appeared quite recently

but they may have been struck from genuine surviving dies. The flat surfaces of the inscriptions show clearly that the dies were not made for the thin copper blanks which were used for the ''Paisas''. Karauli

11. AR Nazarana rupee, 11.1g, AD 1891/RY 5  12. CU Nazarana paisa, 8.9 - 10.6g, AD 1891/ RY 5 The Nazarana rupee 11 and the Paisa 12 were struck from the same set of dies. The coins show the obverse and reverse inscriptions of the rupees in the names of the exalted Queen, the Emperor of India, and Bhanwar Pal of Karauli. The dies have been copied from Webb: plate XI, 3. --- Jodhpur

The fake Nazarana rupee imitates the 3rd rupee series of Maharaja Jaswant Singh struck at the Jodhpur mint (in my notes Marwar no.127.04/ VS 1943-1940). The coin shows a few irregularities which are supposed to make it a rare piece:

Date errors occur in this series but not dates with only 3 digits. The sword on the reverse looks like a dagger. The Alif in "'di raj'? has been transformed into a dagger. Jhalawar 14. CU Nazarana paisa, 8.3 - 9g, RY 30.

The coins, which can regularly be found with Delhi dealers, show the inscriptions of the Jhalawar coins in the name of Queen Victoria with a frozen VS 1915 on the obverse (type 3 of my notes), but the spelling and the calligraphy are even worse than on genuine coins, which do not go beyond RY 28.

The fake coins of type 14 show clear traces of casting but it seems that the dies and not the coins were cast. Unlike some of the other types these forgeries can hardly deceive a specialist.

It is evident that the producer of the fakes 1-9 and 11-13 must have some numismatic knowledge or at least a numismatically knowledgeable adviser. As most of his coins are based on illustrations in Webb's book they look quite plausible and even an experienced collector of Rajasthani coins will at first accept them as genuine. Only when they are seen and studied as

a group do the coins become recognisable as dangerous forgeries. Two Rare Tibetan Coins by N.G. Rhodes

1 Sho. Brass, proof-like surface. Obv. European-style lion recumbent 1. with head facing, within inner circle; Tibetan-style ornamentation above.

Legend in eight petals around: "'dga'-ldan pho-brang phyogs-las rnam 18/21". Rev. ''sho-gang" (1 sho) in central circle. '"'rab-byung 16 lo 1" (date 1927) around, with flowers between letters. Diam. 24mm. Wt. 5.3 g. Edge plain.

5 Sho. Silver. Obv. Much as last, but Tibetan-style lion with head turned backwards. Rev. As last, but "'sho-lnga'' (5 sho) in centre, and date "'rab-byung 16 lo 4"' (date 1930). Diam. 24 mm. Wt. 5.0 g. Edge milled.

The above two coins are of considerable rarity, and should probably be regarded as patterns. I acquired one example of no. 1 from Messrs Spink & Son in the UK in 1977 and two further specimens were acquired by Dr. L. Brilliant about 1983,! one as part of acollection of proofs and patterns from the Birmingham Mint. The coin was clearly not struck in Tibet, as the quality of striking is superior to anything ever produced there, and no specimens have ever, to my knowledge, appeared on the Nepalese market from Tibetan sources. The provenance points to manufacture in Birmingham, which is possible, as a pattern brass 20 srang coin (and perhaps also a 1 sho) was struck by Messrs Taylor and Challen there in 1923 at the time that Company supplied coin presses to the Tibetan Government. However, as I have not noted any correspondence regarding the supply of pattern coins or mint machinery from Birmingham in 1927, the place of striking must be regarded as uncertain.

Two specimens of no. 2 appeared in Nepal in 1969. One is still in a private collection there, while the other was acquired by the late Carlo Valdettaro, and is now in my own collection. No further specimens have appeared on the market in recent years, and although the type has been listed under the reference Y.32a, no illustration has previously been published. The style and quality of the striking is purely Tibetan, and the Nepalese provenance indicates that these coins were struck in Tibet.

Cursory examination of the two pieces show that the design of no. 2 was closely copied from no. 1, but on closer examination it is clear that the reverse die used for striking no. 2 is, in fact, the same die that was used for no. 1, but completely re-engraved. Traces of the number "1" are clearly visible under the "'4" of the date, and at many other points traces of the alterations are visible. No such traces of re-engraving are visible on the obverse, but it is likely that the same die was used, since the basic design is identical and exactly the same number of pellets, 95, appear in the outer beading; the only reason why the re-engraving is not visible is because the design completely covers the flan.

It is therefore clear that the dies for the pattern 1 sho piece were sent to Tibet, perhaps from Birmingham, and were subsequently ground down and re-engraved by the Tibetans, and used to strike the silver 5 sho coins. The silver 5 sho was
never struck in quantity because, in 1930, the Tibetan currency was rapidly losing value. Whereas in February 1929 13.5 shos were equal to an Indian rupee, by October the rupee was worth 19 shos, and by April 1930 about 22.5 shos. As a result the silver value of this 5 sho coin was probably higher than its face value by the time it was struck so that, if any more than a few sample pieces were produced, they were probably quickly melted down. Note

1. "Himalayan Numismatics" List for Winter 1983, no.71 (iilus.). Subsequently one of these pieces appeared in Lepcezyck, sale 59 (12-13 Oct. 1984), lot 767, and S. Album, list 54 (Feb. 1988) no. 1050.

Some Peculiar Leaden Cash from Indonesia by Dr. T. D. Yih

Recently I came into the possession of five peculiar cash pieces. According to the dealer who provided me with these "'lead"' pieces they were sent to a knowledgeable Numismatic International member who considered them to be cash from Indonesia, but who could not provide further information.

When ordering the pieces I first expected to receive some fakes, especially since last year a large number of fake tin cash with northern-Sung reign titles have appeared on the markets of S.E. Asia. However, the first look at them showed otherwise and the pieces are quite comparable with tin cash from Tegal! I saw in a Dutch museum. They share with these pieces the relatively large hole. For Tang and northern-Sung cash from China the ratio diameter/hole is about 3.5-4.0, whereas for Indonesian cash this ratio is considerably smaller (see Table) and for 14th century annamese cash the ratio is around 4.6.2 The pieces had a brownish appearance. Their diameter ranged from 18 to 20 mm.

With respect to their metallic composition their weight indeed suggests a tin-lead alloy. They are not as heavy as the lead cash presented in the ONS-paper by Mitchiner,? but not as light as e.g. tin cash from Palembang (Millies No. 207, dia- meter 18mm, 0.624g).

Their reverses are all blank without traces of rims. Two of them clearly bear chinese legends resembling the T'ang reign title "Kai Yuan" (Nos. 1 and 2). The character pao on no. 1 is corrupted, whereas the legends of no. 2 'Kai Yuan tung wu"

is an absurdity from a chinese numismatic point of view.

The chinese origin of the inscriptions in nos. 3 and 4 are less clear. The symbol (1) might be a corruption of the character "wu" (); the symbol ( 4) might be the character '"'sa"" meaning thirty; the symbol ( % ) does not resemble any known chinese character. On the other hand such symbols are found on so-called temple-cash (Gobogs) from Java. The symbol ( $3) can be found in gobogs illustrated by Netscher,* no.144 and by Millies,5 no. 31. In addition these pieces bear one or two crescents.

The fifth piece bears only 4 crescents around the hole. Millies (no. 167) illustrates a cash piece called "'keteng"' with four 4-pointed stars around the hole.

Corrupted chinese legends are well-known from early Java cash as can be seen in figs. 6 and 7. These are tin pieces reported to originate from the region of Tegal on Java and are present in the collection of a Dutch museum. The legends for no. 6 and 7 are respectively: Hsien Ping yuan pao ) Jay ) and Tien Hsia tai ping( 2 \[\* As can be seen, not only are the characters themselves corrupt, but in no. 6 the sequence of reading is unusual. Table 1 gives a summary of the most important parameters of the coins presented above. Anyone who has information on these types of coins is kindly requested to contact the ONS or write to me directly (Dr. T D Yih, Vicaris Hermansstr. 6, 5361 AZ Grave, Netherlands).

Acknowledgements The author is grateful to Dr. Ross, Ethnographical Museum, Rotterdam, for giving the opportunity to photograph the tin cash from Java. The author is indebted to Mr. P. E. T. van Keulen for technical assistance in preparing the plate. References

1. Tin cash with Chinese, Javanese and other inscriptions, Notulen der Algemene en Directie-vergaderingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap voor Kunsten en Wetenschappen 24, p.4, 1886. 2. Yih, T.D., to be published.

3. Mitchiner, M. (1986), Early javanese cash coins, ONS Bulletin 101. 4. Netscher, E. en van der Chijs, J. A., (1864) De munten van Ned. Indie. 5. Millies, H. ©.  (1871) Recherches sur les Monnaies des Indigénes de l'Archipel Indien.

No. Legends W (@g) O (mm) \* (mm) O/\* T (mm) Rim in. out.

1631 Yuan tung pao 1.444 20.50 Loo 2.72 0.90 1.25 Kai Yuan tung wu 0.787 18.25 9.95 1.83 0.65 ~ Wu(a) > * 1.529 19.70 7.90 2.49 1.20 1.85 2.8 1.281 19.20 7.70 2.49 0.95 1.05 > 1.207 19.60 10.20 1.92 1.00 0.45

6+ Hsien Ping yuan pao 0.475 16.75 6.46 2.59 - - 1.08

7+ ~~ Tien Hsia Tai Ping 0.490 17.94 6.46 2.78 0.60 Palembang 0.624 18.10 7.05 0.65 0.15 0.65

## "A

tia W = weight; O = total diameter; \* = diameter hole; T = thickness; - = not present;? = traces; + = Ethnographical Museum otterdam. '

Galata Print, Park House, Albert Road, Wolverhampton WV6 6