# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Europe: Dr. H. J. van der Wiel, Mr. M. R. Broome,

UK & Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins, Newsletter Editor Mr. S. Goron, America: Mr. W. B. Warden, Jr., Annual Subscription

## £6.00; 11. Fl. 25; FF 75; $10. South Asia: Mr. P. P. Kulkarni, Regional Secretaries

General: Mr. G. P. Hennequin, NEWSLETTER no. 105

## March - April 1987

This month we are starting a series of articles about ONS officers. The aim is to put a face to the names and to tell you something about the people concerned. Bill Warden, our American Regional Secretary, has the honour of being first in line.

Bill Warden graduated with an M.A. degree in Near Eastern History from Rudgers University, as well as having a B.A. from Rider College. Now aged 39, he spent 15 years as VicePresident and Contracts Manager of an engineering company before leaving the company in 1986 to become a full-time coin dealer. Bill's collecting interests over the past 25 years have embraced Roman Imperial, Parthian, Sassanian, Kushano-Sassanian, Hun/Hephtalite, Arab-Sassanian and Moghal coinage. He is a founder member of the ONS as well as belonging to the RNS, ANS, SAN, the American Institute of Archaeology and the British Institute for Persian studies. He is also a member of the ANS Standing Committee for Islamic and South Asian coins. Bill's other interests are classical music, art and ancient and mediaeval history (especially of the Near East and India) and the art and history of mediaeval and Renaissance Italy. ONS News

1.  Revised subscription rates are now available to members residing in the South Asian Region and paying their subscriptions directly to Mr. Kulkarni. Details are: 100 Indian Rupees for an initial subscription (i.e. for new members) and 75 Indian Rupees per annum thereafter.

2.  A revised membership list is currently with the printers and will be distributed in the near future. Members' News & Views

1.  - Gurnet is starting a die study of the coins of the Sassanian rulers Kavad 11 and Ardashir 111. He would be grateful if members would send him full details, including die axis, of any specimens in their possession. His address is:...

2.  Ken Mackenzie, an ONS member of long standing and a regular contributor to the Newsletter over the years, recently retired after 25 years service with the Macmillan Publishing Company. We wish him well in his retirement and look forward to

a further supply of interesting articles in due course.

3.  Steve Fass... specialises in Egyptian coins struck between AH 918 and AH 1293. He is currently compiling a date list of these issues in all metals and would like to hear from any member who either has or can confirm seeing any unlisted or very rare pieces in this series. Some of the pieces he has been able to verify so far (all Misr mint) are:

1115 Ahmed III % Altin 1293 Murad V 100 Guerche 1171 Mustafa III Altin 50 Guerche 1203 Selim III % Zeri Mahbub (AU) 1293 Abdul Hamid 11 100 Guerche, yrs. 1,6 AU

1 para, yrs. 21, 22, 23 50 Guerche yr. 6, AU 1222 MustafaIV 20 para 20 Guerche yr. 6, AR

1 piastre 10 Guerche yr. 6, AR 1223 Mahmud II 5 Guerche, New Style, yr. 8 5 Guerche yr. 6, AR

1/4 Zeri Mahbub, yr. 8 2% Guerche yr. 6, AR 1277 Abdul Aziz 40 para, yr. 10, AU 20 para yr. 5 80 para, Nickel 20 para, AE, yr. 11 20 para, AR, yr. 1

4.  Mr. H. N. Versteeg of... has sent in an enquiry about the existence of any computer database of Arabic coins. He writes:

Being an enthusiastic collector of Middle and Far Eastern coins I often find myself handicapped by being unable to decipher Arabic coins in spite of Richard Plant's manual. Moreover, smaller coins sometimes reveal only part of the text of a larger die. In order to establish the origin of an older coin, I have to search through my catalogues for the appropriate catalogue reference. Occasionally I have to repeat this process many times.
I feel that in this age of computer technology more efficient and time saving methods could be designed. For example, the creation of a computer database which could contain the catalogue number and specific characteristics of each coin, would be advantageous. To trace an unknown coin the computer may be asked to search for various characteristics entered by the user of the

database. Subsequently, all the catalogue numbers of coins conforming to these characteristics would be displayed. To avoid having to set up a database which might already be in existence I would like to know: - if such a database and search program is in existence - if copies of database and program are available - if there are collectors interested in programs of this nature. Material suitable for a 64 Kbyte MSX computer would be most useful to me. I would also be interested in other types of basic programs since it may be possible to translate them. Any suggestions on how to obtain a copy or how to streamline the creation of such a database and program would be much appreciated.

5. Bill Warden's March 1987 fixed price list is available free on request. Stephen Album has also just published his list no. 49. --- Recent Publications

1.  In January the Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies held a seminar on the subject of Numismatics and Archaeology. A wide range of papers was read by both Indian and invited specialists from other countries. These have now

been published as a 143 page book available from the Institute for $50. Perhaps we can now look forward to the publication of the papers given at the Institute's inaugural seminar in 1984. The Institute's address is 2. 0. Anjaneri, Dist. Nasik, Maharashtra 422 213, India.

2. The Directorate of Museum: Assam, Guwahati 781001, India, has recently published A Source Book of the Numismatic Studies in North East India, vol. 1. Compiled by R. D. Choudhury, this book contains 33 articles on N. E. Indian coins, almost all reprinted from earlier works. As many of these articles were previously difficult to locate, this volume provides a very useful compilation.

3.  The Numismatic Society of India have brought out a souvenir volume on the occasion of their 74th annual conference, which was held at Guwahati last December.

4. The Revue suisse de numismatique 65 (1986) contained an article by Michael Bates entitled "History, Geography and Numismatics in the first century of Islamic coinage" (pp.23 1-62).

5. J. R. Crawford has sent details of two articles he has published in the Journal of the Hong Kong Archaeological Society. Both articles deal with coin finds at various sites in that territory. They are: The coins of Sham Wan Tsuen (JHKAS X-1983/4), and Southern Sung coin Hoards from Hong Kong (JHKAS XI-1984/S).

6. John Sylvester, Jr. (10109 Earthstone Court, Raleigh, N.C. 27609, U.S.A.) has sent information on four monographs available from him on the subject of Indochina medals. These are soft card cover, photocopied works with the medal illustrations of varied quality. They are intended to be a methodical catalogue of the awards with short commentary on history and the awards systems.

The Traditional Awards of Annam: Thekahnh, Boi, Tien, and Bai. $16.50 The Orders & Medals of Cambodia and Laos. $16.50 The Orders & Medals of French Indochina. $12.00 The Medals of the Outside countries for the Wars and Peaces in Indochina. $15.00 Prices include postage within U.S.A.; postage overseas is extra.

7. Tom Noonan has published three articles during the past year which may be of interest to members. These are:

- ''Why Dirhams First Reached Russia: The Role of the Arab-Khazar Relation in the Development of the Earliest Islam Trade with Eastern Europe'', in Archivum Eurasiae Medii Aevi, 4 (1984), pp.151-282; ii) 'Early Abbasid Mint Output', in Journal of the Social and Economic History of the Orient, 29 (1986), pp.113-175; iii) 'Why the Vikings First Came to Russia'', in Jarbiicher fiir Geschichte Osteuropas, 34 (1986), pp.321-48. This article argues that it was the flow of Dirhams into Russia starting c. AD 800 which attracted the Vikings into the interior of Russia. Auction News

In recent years the increased interest in oriental and Islamic coinages has led to a number of specialised auctions being organised by some of the leading auction houses. These auctions usually contain a number of rare and important pieces and it is therefore useful for ONS members to be aware of them. Where possible, i.e. depending on information received and timing, we shall seek to include mention of such auctions in this and future Newsletters.

On 17 March 1987, Spink & Son Numismatics Ltd., Lowenstrasse 65, 8001 Zurich, Switzerland, are holding an auction entitled ''Coins of the Arab World'. There are 523 lots. Most of these are Islamic gold pieces from the Near and Middle East, ranging from the earliest Islamic period to modern times. There are also some lots of pre-Islamic material from the Middle-

East and some rare Islamic silver coins. Collectors of Indian coinage will find only five lots of interest. There is not space here to describe the many rarities in the auction but we illustrate below the most spectacular of the lots (no.502) - a gold, treasury coin set struck under the authority of the Qajar, Agha Mohammed Shah in Teheran in the year AH 1210. Details of these coins as well as all the other coins in the auction can be found in the superb, hard-backed auction catalogue written by ONS member Robert Darley-Doran and obtainable from Spink & Son Ltd., Ziirich, or 5-7 King St., St. James's, London SWLY 6QS. ١ 1 ا‎ RoE

## yeh ihe ~ ةم 0 Photo by courtesy of Spink & Son Ltd. --- Book Review

The Encyclopaedia of the Coins of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei 1400 - 1986 by Saran Singh, AMN, FRNS; published by the Malaysia Numismatic Society, Kuala Lumpur, 1986, pp.674 plus free price guide (pp.54), with half tone illustrations; price Malaysian $ 67.00. Review by Howard Simmons.

The Encyclopaedia of the Coins of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei is a well-produced volume published by the Malaysia Numismatic Society. Ably edited by Saran Singh, the work includes a wealth of information that will make this a standard work of reference for years to come.

The first chapter is concerned with the coinage of Malacca. It covers the Malacca Sultanate, the private Chinese issues and the Portuguese and Dutch issues. The sultanate coins are rarely seen and the use of line drawings overcomes the difficulty of dealing with what are essentially unphotogenic tin coins. The dubious nature of the coins depicted on page 8 should have been more strongly emphasised as the publication of copies sometimes lends an aura of authenticity to doubtful coins.

The coins of Portuguese Malacca are treated more as a corpus than a catalogue. As a result, some of the issues have several numbers just for minor varieties. This is most noticeable in the numbers MO4 to M19, which are essentially the same - any variation being a consequence of the method of production. This numbering of minor varieties will make attribution of a coin to a particular catalogue number difficult. It also confuses what is really a variety with a type. Notwithstanding this, the inclusion of so many coins will make this section very valuable in unravelling this series. The appearance of a number of Portuguese Malacca coins on the market in recent years has added much to our knowledge of this series and much of the new material is published here.

The Dutch coins have been treated in a slightly different manner; the main criteria used are denomination and province. Craig numbers, given with the corresponding Scholten number, denote type. This method creates only minor difficulties for those familiar with the Craig numbering system, but may cause problems for those familiar with Scholten.

Chapters two to ten cover the states of Johore, Pahang, Trengganu, Perak, Kelantan, Kedah and Perlis, Selangor, Negri Sembilan and Penang, and must be of fundamental interest to students of the numismatics of the area, as the coins are not catalogued elsewhere. The merit of this work is that it does record everything and so provides an unrivalled catalogue. However, the cross references have been made to Pridmore in some cases and to Craig (for Penang), but not always to both where appropriate.

The more modern coins and tokens are treated well. It is useful and relevant to include contemporary forgeries in the listing. This aspect of monetary history is often ignored by major catalogues, and is a welcome inclusion.

The Brunei coins are seldom encountered outside the country, but here the picture of the coinage is somewhat confused by several pages of minor varieties.

The chapter on the foreign coins circulating in the Malayan Peninsula brings to a conclusion this valuable catalogue. The listing on the Kingdoms of Pasai and Acheh is most useful as this is not readily available elsewhere. Treatment of these coins in a similar manner to the rest of the book would have been welcome as they are not numbered or transliterated.

One final comment: as so many Malay and Brunei coins are made of tin or tin/lead alloy rather more could have been said on the inherent instability of the metal. This is actually exacerbated in cold climates as 'tin disease' occurs at temperatures below

10° C when the metal is unstable. This factor does not really apply in South-East Asia, but is most important in Europe and North America, because more care has to be taken when cleaning and storing these coins.

Overall, the Malaysia Numismatic Society and their sponsors are to be congratulated on producing a comprehensive and useful work. The accompanying price guide is in Malaysian Ringgit and in the majority of cases seems rather high to the westerner, but it would appear that this reflects a healthy market in Malaysia rather than general overpricing.

A Sallarid Dirham of Abu Nasr Justan B. Sharmazan by R. J. Hebert

The history of the Sallarids of Daylam and Azerbaijan, also known as Musafirids or Kangarids, is sometimes "'obscure and fragmentary''.! A listing of these rulers, with their dates, insofar as they are known, follows.

The Musafirids? or Sallarids? or Kangarids\* c.304-c.483/ c.916-c. 1090. Daylam and Azerbaijan

before 304/916 Muhammad b. Musafir, lord of Tarum in Daylam. 330/941 Marzuban I b. Muhammad (in Azerbaijan and Arran) 330/941 Wahsudan b. Muhammad (in Tarum) 346/957 Justan I b. Marzuban (in Azerbaijan) 349/960 Ibrahim I b. Marzuban (in Azerbaijan till d.373/983) 355/966 Marzuban II b. Isma'il b. Wahsudan (in Tarum till 374/984) 387/997 Ibrahim II b. Marzuban II (re-established at Tarum, still alive 420/1029)? Justan II b. Ibrahim (reigning 437/1045)? Musafir b. Ibrahim (reigning 454/1062) Bi Dynasty extinguished by the Isma'ilis of Alamut5

The Sallarid dynasty is one where numismatics should play an important role in filling in lacunae. It is for this reason that I note here an apparently unpublished dirham of Abu Nasr Justan (Jasatan) b. Sharmazan struck at Ardabil (see the upper left

hand corner of the map) in A.H.355 (December 28, 965 - December 17, 966). For this period, Madelung® writes:

After the capture of Daisam7 al-Marzuban's® reign remained undisturbed until his death in 346/957. A list of his tri-

butaries in the year 344/955-6 quoted by Ibn Hauqal shows that his suzerainty was recognised by most of the petty princes in the Caucasus area and Armenia. Before his death al-Marzuban named his brother Vahsudan? as his successor. The commanders of the fortresses refused, however, to surrender them to him obeying the previous instructions of alMarzuban which had provided for the successive rule of al-Marzuban's sons Justan, Ibrahim and Nasir. Unable to impose

his authority, Vahsudan returned to Tarum. Justan!° gained control in Azerbaijan while Ibrahim!! ruled in Dvin as his deputy. Vahsudan's efforts to sow discord among his nephews soon bore fruit, especially as Justan devoted more and more time to his harem. In 349/960 a grandson of the caliph al-Muktafi, Ishaq b. 'Isa, revolted in Gilan adopting the
caliphal name al-Mustajir bi'llah and found support among the Sunnis of western Gilan. The former vizier of Justan, who had escaped from prison, invited him to come to Mugan where he gathered supporters for his cause. Justan and Ibrahim defeated them, and the 'Abbasid was captured and died in prison. Shortly afterwards Vahsudan succeeded in luring Justan and Nasir together with their mother to Tarum, where he imprisoned them. Then he sent his son Isma'il to take over the rule in Azerbaijan. When Ibrahim in Armenia gathered an army to oppose Isma'il and free his brothers, Vahsudan executed them and their mother. Ibrahim was driven out of Azerbaijan by the supporters of Isma'il, but retained control of Armenia. Just as he had again assembled a strong army, Isma'il died, between 351/962 and 354/965 according to numismatic evidence. Ibrahim now occupied Ardabil and devastated the domains of Vahsudan, while the latter fled to Dailaman. In 355/966 Ibrahim was defeated by an army of Vahsudan, who had returned to Tarum. Deserted by his army Ibrahim sought refuge in Ray with Rukn al-Daula!2 while Vahsudan put his son Nuh in charge of the government of Azerbaijan. Rukn al-Daula treated his brother-in-law most generously and sent his vizier Ibn al--Amid with an army to reinstate him in his domains. Ibn al'Amid conquered Azerbaijan and ordered its administration. Then he wrote to Rukn al-Daula proposing to dispossess the Sallarid since he would be unable to keep the country under control and would squander its wealth, but Rukn al-Daula refused to betray the good faith of Ibrahim and recalled the vizier. After Ibn al'Amid's departure Vahsudan in 356/967 again sent an army which burnt Ardabil. \[brahim concluded a

peace with his uncle, ceding to him a part of Azerbaijan, presumably the region of Miyana.

5 pF SS 77 اا0اااااللبا‎ ----------\_\_= ---- لا777ج77‎ $$ = $$

##. زم لحك
## حا د تيب 0 يبيب 0 ----- a ------ حتت

# 33°N > fi \\Hausam: \*

Pulrcg (ONAN SS د‎ bad / > g La 9 $$ = $$ "ke Tamisha ¢, Zanjan Sh. L, 5 0 Bistam

# \\ SS % ag utvavard 2 Pep \*Damghan \*Qimis

## \*Damavand Simnin km t - - j miles

## vie sabe

Map of the Caspian provinces (from Cambridge History of Iran)

The piece presented here fits into that tumultous year just before the burning of Ardabil in 356. Since Justan I had been executed with his mother at Tarum a few years earlier by his uncle, we cannot look to him as the issuer of this piece. Was the name Justan b. Sharmazan the Persian equivalent of Ibrahim I b. Marzuban who according to Madelung occupied Ardabil between 351/4-355? Was it struck just before his defeat by Wahsudan? Was it struck by a usurper or governor? Or was it an issue of Nuh b. Wahsudan who had been put in charge of Azerbaijan by his father? 13

## Obverse Reverse ss are en: a

## oy محمد رسو هتلا\[ الله‎ لاشر يك له‎ db المطيع‎

# امسد د

ابو نصصر‎ Inner margin:. on ناتسج بن »,نزمرش‎ مهردلا‎ IAP بمالله صرب‎ Be اقيق ' سه‎ Margin:

## و

نيسمخ و ثلث مائه‎ silver, 28.8mm., 4.795 grams هتنازوسر هلسرأ‎

# Outer margin

OF و لوكرها لمش ر‎ U5 على ا لدي‎ بالهدى و قحلانيد ليظهره فى نينسلاعضب رمالاهتن‎

| من قبل و من بعد | ذئموي‎ |
|:--- |:--- |
| يفرح | نونمؤملا‎ |
| The Caliph al-Muti°'s years were from 334-363/946-974. | The lagab al-Musaddid "One who directs properly" is new to me. It would be good to hear from anyone who has similar |

# يفرح نونمؤملا‎

The Caliph al-Muti°'s years were from 334-363/946-974. The lagab al-Musaddid "One who directs properly" is new to me. It would be good to hear from anyone who has similar material. --- Notes

-  - 87, C. E. Bosworth, The Islamic Dynasties, Edinburgh: University Press 1967. See pp.223-226, W. Madelung, chapter 6, The Minor Dynasties of Northern Iran, The Cambridge History of Iran, ed. R. N. Frye, Cambridge University Press, 1975, for "'the Justanids and

the Sallarids of Tarum in the 4th/10th century"'.

Zu The name Musafir, Muhammad's father, is an Arabicization of Asvar. Sallar (also Salar), son of Asvar, from sardar, "'prince, leader', later used the Muslim name Muhammad.

4.  Madelung (p.224, fn.1) writes: In Yaqut, vol. III, p.149, the name (Langar) appears as Kankar, and this form was accepted by A. Kasravi and V. Minorsky who called the dynasty Kangari. In all other sources, however, the first letter of the name is Jam. The Ziyarid

Vushmgir named two of his sons Salar and Langar. This choice of names may indicate that their mother was a Sallarid princess, most

likely a daughter of Muhammad b. Musafir. 5.  - 86, Bosworth, op. cit.

6.  pp. 235-236, Madelung, op. cit. Daisam b. Ibrahim al-Kurdi. On his coinage, see A. A. Bykov, "Monety Daisama ibn Ibrakhima al-Kurdi (Coins of Daysam b. Ibrahim alKurdi). XXV Mazhdunarodni Kongress Vostokovedov. Doklady delegatssi SSSR (25th International Orientalist Congress. Report of the U.S.S.R. Delegation). Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Vostochnoi Literatury 1960. 13pp. illus. 8.  Marzuban I b. Muhammad, Sallarid ruler of Azerbaijan, 330. 9.  Wahsudan b. Muhammad, Sallarid, 330-346. He had struck in his name a beautiful dirham dated 343/954-5 at an unidentified location (Jalalabad) with the honorific "Sword of the family of Muhammad", and the names of the Isma'ili imams. Madelung (p.373, fn.4)

writes: Cf. S. M. Stern, ''The early Isma'ili Missionaries in North-West Persia and Khurasan and Transoxiana'', BSOAS, vol. XXIII (1960) pp.72-4. The present writer now knows of four more specimens of this remarkable coin. 10.  Justan I b. al-Marzuban b. Muhammad, Sallarid, 346-349. Miles (VHR, p.164) in reference to no. 187 writes: In 355, Ibrahim al-Salar

fled from Azerbaijan to Rukn al-Dawlah at Rayy, where he was received with great respect by the Buyid prince. Rukn al-Dawlah had formed an alliance with Ibrahim's father, Marzuban, whose daughter had borne Rukn al-Dawlah's son, abu-al'Abbas. Miskawayh was himself present at the presentation of gifts to Ibrahim, and we have in the passage a valuable description of the city and the luxuries of the age. (Miskawayh, II, 218, 113-219, 1.8).

11.  Ibrahim I b. al-Marzuban b. Muhammad, Sallarid, 349-355. 12.  The Buyid Rukn al-Dawla Hasan, 335-366. 13.  Neither R. N. Frye's article on Ardabil, nor V. Minorsky on ''Daylam'' in the EJ provide answers. For the 40's and 50's, Vesmer, Jslamica, 1927, vol. 111, pp.165-186, 482-485, gives for Ardabil: 343, dinar al-Salar Abu Mansur, and al-Marzuban b. Muhammad Abu Nasr;

347, dirham Ibrahim b. al-Marzuban and Justan b. al-Marzuban; 351, dirham, Isma'il b. Wahsudan and al-Salar Wahsudan b. Muhammad; 354, dirham, al-Wazir Sa'id b. 'Abd Allah and al-Salar al-Mansur b. al-Marzuban; and 355, dirham, Nuh b. Wahsudan Abu 'l-Hasan and al-Salar al-Sayyid Wahsudan b. Muhammad. He has also for 355 two other types: dirham, Wahsudan b. Muhammad Sayf Al Muhammad, and Dirham, Rukn ad Dawla Abu 'Ali and al-Salar al-Mansur Ibrahim b. al-Marzuban Wahsudan b. al-Salar.

Notes on the Sultans of Kashmir. Part 4. by Nicholas Rhodes and Stan Goron. 4. The Earliest Coins of the Sultans

Now that the silver coins previously attributed to the period before 842 AH (1438 AD) have all been assigned to a later period, the whole matter of when the Sultans first struck silver coins in Kashmir should be reopened. Up to now, the only silver coins to have been published are the square pieces weighing about 6.2 grms. However, in the Ashmolean Museum there is one round piece which weighs 2.89 grms, and therefore seems to be struck on a different standard, though which one is not clear.

## 'I

' As-Sultan بد العأ‎ Zain-ul-'A biden al-'Azam عب هام‎ 7 meg Fig. 6

This coin is struck in the name of Zain-ul-Abiden and is dated AH 842, like his square coins. At this time in Dehli, under Muhammed V, the basic coin was the billon tanka weighing just over 9 grams and containing not more than about 25% silver.!2 This Kashmir coin is therefore too heavy to correspond to a Dehli tanka. It is also a bit too heavy to correspond to a

¥% of the old Dehli silver tanka which weighed around 11 grams. The contemporary Timurid tanka of Shah Rukh weighed 5.1 grams, which does not fit in with the present coin. All this, of course, assumes that the mint personnel were careful when weighing out the metal for the coins. If they were not, then this coin could represent the % old Dehli silver tanka already mentioned or indeed be a somewhat lightweight half-value of the square silver coin series.

Apart from this quarter tanka, we know of one other round silver coin of the Sultans of Kashmir, a full tanka in the British Museum:

# Nasir Amir

2 I oli At Abu-l Muzaffar ul-Mumenin اللو \| منسن‎ a Sultan Ghiyath-ud-Daulat \* fats 5 pore Zain wa ud-Din غياث الاو‎ 8 4 1 ul-'A biden wal الرو‎ \\,

\* The laqabs of Indian sultans are usually of the form...ud-Dunya waud-Din =... of the world and the faith. The laqab on this coin seems to read: Ghiyath-ud-Daulat wa ud-Din = The help of the state and faith. It is by no means certain, however, that the word is "Daulat"', as it is written -V19) instead of the usual لت‎ 9.) There is also an additional Alef in the phrase "'Al-Mumenin''.

This piece has no date. The type is reminiscent of the earlier tankas of Delhi, rather than the contemporary Delhi coinage. This is not surprising since earlier pieces were struck in such large numbers that they may well have been more easily available in Kashmir than the more recent issues. The weight, 10.91 grams, shows that this piece was struck to the Tanka standard of Delhi, rather than to any local standard.

The rarity of these round Tanka standard pieces shows that their issue must have been short lived; perhaps they were the first experimental attempt at the issue of a silver coinage by Zain-ul-Abiden, or perhaps they were special issues for presentation or
commemorative purposes. Whatever the case, these coins, if in circulation, must have been quickly withdrawn and replaced by the square issues based on a local weight standard. The date of 842 AH (1438/9) presumably indicates that it was in that year that Zain-ul-Abiden first struck silver coins, rather than in his accession year, 823 AH. Whether the square pieces, which

bear the same date, were issued in the same year must remain an open question.

\_ It should also be mentioned that, although most, if not all, the dated copper pieces of Zain-ul-A biden carry later dates (e.g. 848, 851), there is one anonymous square copper (brass?) issue that is distinctly heavier, differs in style from the other Kashmir copper coins, and is dated AH 812 or, more usually, 813.13 These dates fall in the reign of Sikandar Shah, and these pieces may well be the earliest coins struck by the Sultans of Kashmir, well before they started striking in silver and gold.

As regards the gold of Zain-ul-Abiden, one round piece, weighing 11.2 grams was published by Whitehead!\*, but no meaningful date can be read. There was, however, one square gold coin in the Bleazby collection!5, that was of similar type to the square silver coins, and weighed 6.3 grams. Presumably the round type corresponds to the first issue, struck to Delhi standards, whereas the square piece was struck when it was decided to change the standard of the silver coins. Whereas the silver coins circulated widely, and the change in weight standard was successful in avoiding export of silver from Kashmir, the gold

coins remained rare, and it must have been decided to revert back to the Delhi standard, as all later gold coins of the Sultans are round and are struck to the heavier standard of about 11.2 grams. Notes

12.  See H. Nelson-Wright: The Coinage and Metrology of the Sultans of Delhi, OUP (1936), reprinted Delhi, 1974, appendix 81 where assays of coins of this period (though not of Muhammed V) are noted. 13.  W.H. Valentine: The Copper Coins of India, part 2, p.230, no. 4. 14.  \_R. 8. Whitehead: "The Gold Coins of the Sultans of Kashmir", Num. Chron. 1933, pp.256-67. Coin no. 1 (British Museum). 15.  - Schulman, Amsterdam, Auction sale 12. 1. 1913, lot 368. Unfortunately we do not know the present whereabouts of this piece. Moghal Miscellany

The following coins are published by courtesy of Gerry Brennig or R. C. Senior Ltd. All photographs are enlarged.

1.  A 1/12 rupee of Jehangir struck at Burhanpur

A number of fractional pieces of Jehangir and Shah Jehan from Burhanpur have been published in the past, mainly in Indian

journals (see also Newsletter 104). We publish here what is presumably a 1/12 rupee of Jehangir.

# \_: Jehangir sl. ~U! بر يانيور‎ 57 Nur-ud-din اميه حم‎ uriba ور نيرلا‎ a

Only a part of the legend is on the coin though some of it can be completed with reasonable certainty. The coin seems to be dated year 8, in which case it would have been struck in AH 1022 or 1023. The weight is 0.875 grams, a little light for a 1/12, but the coin is somewhat worn. (Brennig) 2. Shah Jehan I: A copper dam of Akbarabad

The copper coins of Shah Jehan I from Akbarabad are usually the dam of around 20 grams or the 1/8 dam of around 2% grams. The coin published here is of a type known from the 1/8 dam (cf. Lahore Museum Catalogue nos. 1459-61) but does not seem to have been published for the whole dam.

## Wid

Js,: lw obi! Akbarabad Shah > ee Zuriba Jehani

The coin is dated AH 1044 year 7 and weighs 20 grams. (Brennig) 3. Aurangzeb: an 1/8 rupee of Lahore

- 8. Whitehead published two Aurangzeb 1/8 rupees of Lahore in his article "'Some notable coins of the Mughal Emperors in India' (Num. Chron. 1926-7), nos. 60 and 61. These coins were dated yr. 26 and AH 1112 yr. 45, respectively. The present coin is dated year 6 but does not have an AH date. It is possibly of the same type as those published by Whitehead but the fact that most of the obverse bottom line is missing makes such a comparison difficult.
## Zuriba 7 مو‎ y Lahore سه‎ WY صر‎ 6

If this coin is of the same type as the Whitehead ones, the bottom obverse line would represent د‎ L Ww - Nisar Bad... The coin weighs 1.4 grams. Diameter: 12 mm. (R. C. Senior, Ltd.) 4. Farrukhsiyar: an 1/8 rupee of Ujjain

This coin bears part of the standard Farrukhsiyar rupee legends and was struck at Dar-ul-Fath Ujjain, in what appears to be year 6 of his reign. It weighs 1.46 grams, with a diameter of 13 mm.

Small coins like this are often retrieved from the river at Ujjain. They have a dark patina and were probably thrown into the river as religious offerings. (R. C. Senior, Ltd.) Two Tibetan Pattern Coins by N. G. Rhodes

Few Tibetan pattern coins have been published, and the two copper pieces from my collection illustrated below have not previously been described.

1.  Obv: Lion in front of mountains, sun and moon above. Legend above, ''gGa'-ldan-pho-brang-phyogs-las-rnam-rgyal"'

- "The Gaden Palace, victorious on all sides', which is an epithet for "The Tibetan Government''. Legend below, "'dngul-srang-Inga-bchu-tam-pa" - ''Coin of value fifty silver srang''. Rev: Ornamental mirror on stand. Legend above, "gangs-chos-srid-gnyis-ldan-rab-lo-925"' - ''The snow region, both religious and civil administration, in the excellent year 925". Legend below, "'spyi-lo 1951'' - "'Christian year 1951". Weight 17.3 grams. Diameter 34 mm. Edge milled. 2.  Obv: Much as last, but legend below reads: "'Srang-Inga"" - "Five Srang"'. The engraving of the die is not quite so fine

as on No. 1. Rev: Much as last, but slightly abbreviated legend, ending "... -rab-lo-927'', i.e. dated 1953 AD. Weight 6.2 grams. Diameter 26 mm. Edge milled.! No. 1, with its high denomination, is presumably a pattern for a fine silver coin, and No. 2 for a base silver piece, the half of the common 10 Srang. Neither is, however, known in any metal other than copper. No. 1 appears to be unique, while about

a dozen specimens of No. 2 are so far known. \| purchased both pieces separately in Kathmandu in 1967, and was told at the time by the Newari trader who sold it to me, that only 6 specimens of the larger piece had been struck.

The most remarkable feature of both coins is the system of dating. Whereas other Tibetan coins are dated in the 60 year cycle with Yr. 1 of the first cycle being 1027AD, the date when the "'Kala Chakra Tantra'"' was brought to Tibet, these pieces are dated in actual numbers of years from the same date. In addition, the 50 Srang piece is unique in also being dated in the Christian era.

In the absence of Tibetan mint records, it is difficult to be certain of the background to the issue of these pattern pieces, although the standard of striking points to their having been made in Lhasa. According to Ngawang Thondup Narkyid?, the Tibetan artist dGe-'dun Chos-'phel? was asked by Mr. Samdrup Phodang to design new coins in about 1950, so it is possible

that this 50 Srang coin was the result, but I have not been able to confirm this information. Since dGe-'dun Chos-'phel died in October 1951, the 5 Srang cannot have been the work of this artist.

1, The obverse of this piece was illustrated on p.34 of the Chinese book "Zhongguo Lidai Huobi'', Beijing 1982, as an example of an ordinary Tibetan copper coin.

Za Verbal information given to the author in 1979.

For further information on this remarkable Tibetan scholar, artist and revolutionary, cf. '"\\dGe-'dun Chos-'phel, the artist", by Heather Karmay in '"'Tibetan Studies in Honour of Hugh Richardson'', Warminster 1980, pp.144-9. Help Provided

In Newsletter 104 we illustrated an Afghan medal and asked whether any member could read and decipher the reverse legend. Omar Hamidi has kindly provided the following information: This is a silver medal of Abdul Rahman (AH 1297-1319/AD1880-1901) struck to commemorate the victory over the rebel-

## lious Shenwari tribe.

bad aie Obv. Rev. ع سيو رب‎ Fath Shenwari Kalima. ممم.سن‎ Sanah 0

Abdul Rahman, before establishing a firm basis for his autocratic rule, had to subdue several tribes. In addition to the present medal, he issued similar silver commemorative medals in honour of his victories over the Hazara and Mengal tribes. Gold commemorative medals were also struck but are very rare.

Galataprint, Park House, Albert Road, Wolverhampton, WV6 OAG, U.K.