# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

# NEWSLETTER No. 131

## November 1991 January 1992

Oriental Numismatics in Brussels The XIth International Numismatic Congress was held in Brussels, Belgium, September 8-14. It was the largest such congress ever, with more than 700 participants. Organisation was excellent, and the weather warm and dry throughout. It was also the congress where Oriental numismatics, 100 years after the first congress, held in Brussels in 1891, finally fully came of age. After Bern (1Xth) congress, 1979), which saw the first attempt at Moslem numismatics, at M. Bates's initiative, to organise itself within the congress, and London (Xth congress, 1986), where South Asia was also able to assert itself under W. Spengler's leadership, the third strand, namely the Far Eastern one, obtained full recognition this time thanks to a strong Chinese participation and to F. Thierry's untiring

efforts. It is therefore all the more regrettable that the Orient in general and Islam in particular were largely botched in the bibliographical Survey of Numismatic Research 1985-1990 released at the congress' opening, and also that the 9 - member bureau of the International Numismatic Commission 15 left without a single Oriental specialist following M. Bates's retirement after two terms.

Concerning Moslem numismatics (India excluded), 14 papers were read during five working session on Golden Horde coins struck in present day Rumania (Oberlander, Rumania), marks on Buwayhid coins (Ilisch, Germany), by-names of towns on medieval Moslem coins (Artuks, Turkey), fineness of XIth -century dirhams in the BM (Cowell, Britain), Fatamid coins in the Museum of Islamic Art, Cairo (El-Mahdi, Egypt), Aghmat as an Idrisid mint (Laallaoui, Morocco), the XIth -century "silver famine" (Noonan, USA and heated discussion), fineness of Umayyad dinars found in Jordan (Sari, Jordan), dating of Arab-sassanian dirhams (Sears, USA), rare Islamic coins and weights in the author's collection (Shamma, Saudi Arabia), Imperial politics and early Abbasid dirhams (Bacharach, USA), symbols on Rum-Saljuq dirhams (Broome, Britain), imitation and counterfeiting of Ottoman aspers in Rumania, ca.

1500 AD (Nicolae, Rumania) and countermarks of Lesbos island on late Ottoman bronze coins (Wilski, Germany). There was also in

the Indian section, a noteworthy contribution by W. Spengler (USA) on reattribution to the last three Ghaznavids of coinage hitherto

thought to be of the incipient Delhi sultanate. Finally there were two poster presentations on tri-lingual Chaghatayid coins from Sinkiang (Yih, The Low Countries) and coins of a sultan of Kilwa (Brown, Britain).

- Bates chaired the now well-established round table on achievements and prospects of Moslem numismatics.  Among the most important announcements: progress towards publication of the late N M Lowick's Abbasid corpus, forthcoming catalogues of Mughal coins in London and Fatamid coins in Cairo, work on corpuses of figural Turcoman coins and Buwayhid coins, establishment of chairs of Moslem numismatics at universities in Britain and Jordan, etc. M Laallaoui also brought the sad news that D Eustache had passed away 12 Paris last January. The illustrious Moroccan-coinage specialist was recluse and destitute at the time of his death. The Bank of Morocco, Eustache's former employer, has filed a suit in a Paris court in an attempt to retrieve some of his unpublished manuscripts (Idrisid supplement, Almoravids) otherwise threatened by oblivion or outright destruction.

The next congress will be in Berlin, in 1997. Gilles Hennequin

ONS News There will be an ONS meeting on Saturday 21st March, from 13.30 at the British Museum Coin and Medal Department.

On 4th April 1992 the ONS will be holding a study day on the theme 'From Byzantine to Arab-Byzantine'. This will take place

at the British Museum's Coin & Medal Department, 11.00 to 16.00. For further details please contact Marcus Phillips, P O Box 348, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, UK, SG18 8EQ (telephone 0767-312 112).

The Regional Secretary for Europe asks all members who have hitherto paid their annual subscription by bank or postal cheques, to pay the 1992 subscription either in Eurocheques at 35 Dutch Guilders (all other cheques being charged 2.1.15 transfer costs and 8.51.5 bank commission!), or with bank notes sent in a secure letter.

ONS Meeting in Leiden. On 26 October, an ONS meeting took place at the premises of the Royal Coin Cabinet, Leiden. Some 25 members attended. In addition to an auction and a visit to the exhibition room of the Royal Coin Cabinet, Heinz Bons gave a talk on the comage of Mysore

and Ken Wiggins lectured on local Indian mints taken over by the British East India Company. The next Leiden meeting will take place on 24 October, 1992.

ONS Meeting in London. On the morning of 16 November an informal meeting of the ONS took place in the Coin and Medal Department of the British Museum. This was followed in the afternoon by a meeting of the Numismatic section of the Society for South Asian Studies. This session was devoted to the coinages of the Indian Sultanates. Four papers were given:

Stan Goron: The Sultanate silver tanka and its derivatives Ken Wiggins: An unusual coin of Mas'ud, Sultan of.....? (a silver tanka bearing the name of Nasir ud-din Mas'ud). Joe Cribb: IJtutmish and 'Iwaz, a recent hoard of Bengal tankas Venetia Porter: The use of religious titles under Husain Shah Sultan of Bengal.
Kreis der Indien-Miinzsammler a report by Nikolaus Ganske A meeting of the Kreis der Indien-Miinzsammler took place in Cologne on 9 November. Twenty-two members participated. In addition to the usual discussions and exchange activity, several talks were given:

Mr A Rothkopf spoke about Spanish French relationships as portrayed on medals; Mr H Wilski spoke about counterstamps in use on Lesbos; Mr B Rhode spoke about the problems of classification of coins issued during the break-up of the Mughal empire. The nest meeting of the group will take place on 14 November 1992 in the Pullman Hotel Mondial, Cologne. At this event Mr Bons will give a talk on the coins of Mysore.

Exhibitions i Mannheim, Germany: The Museum fiir Archaologie un Volkerkunde in the Reiss Museum is putting on a display "Geld aus Tibet - Die Sammlung Karl Gabrisch" from November 1991 until March 1992.

il In Japan, the Currency Museum Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies (1 - 3 - 1 Nihonbashi - Hongokucho, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103) has a permanent specialised exhibition.

lll Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The Bank Negara Malaysia Money Museum has a permanent display of coins, bank notes and the other monetary items of all periods, with a special emphasis on Malaysian numismatics. (Address: Peti Surat 10922, Jalan Dato' Onn, 50480, Kuala Lumpur.

Coin Collections in German Universities Many universities in Germany have coin collections of some sort. Most of these contain European material but some collections also contain oriental coins. Of possible interest are the collections of:

Gottingen: Georgia Augusta Universitas, Archaologisches Institut, Nikolausbergweg 15. The collection contains 4,010 oriental coins.

Halle-Wittenberg: Martin Luther Universitat, Archaologisches Museum, Universitatsplatz 12 A collection of oriental coins. ili Jena: Frierich Schiller Universitat, Institut fiir Altertums-wissenschaften/ Klassische Archaologie, Kahaische str. 1. A collection of 4500 oriental coins. iv Rostock: Fachbereich Altertumswissenschaften der Universitat, Universitatsplatz 1. The collection in the coin cabinet includes 1800 oriental coins. New and Recent Publications.

1.  Leiser, Gary: "Economic Conditions in Anatolia in the Mongol Period by Ahmet Zeki Validi Togan (Translation)," Annales islamologiques 25 (1990), pp.203-40. This translation of "Mogollar devrinde Anadolu'nun iktisadi," Turk Hukuk ve Iktisat Tahiri
Mecmuasi 1 (1931), pp.1-42, deals with the coinage, monetary systems, taxation administration, and state budgets of Anatolia and

the rest of the Ilkhan realm. An introduction and numerous annotations by the translator bring the references up to date.

2. Numismatic Studies, edited by  D Handa, Harman Publishing House, A23 Industrial Area, Phase II, New Delhi 110 028, India. Price Rs 260.

3.  Numismatic Digest, vol 15 (1991) will shortly be published by the Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies (P.O. Anjaneri, Dist. Nasik, 422 213, Maharashtra, India) Price US $20. Earlier editions are available at the same price. Cheques (add US $2 towards bank charges) or drafts should be made out to the Institute and payable at the State Bank of India, Trimbakeshwar branch, or any bank in Bombay.

4. The UK publication Coin News contained an article in its October 1991 issue, by Colin Narbeth entitled: A Rebel King and his Coins - Sun K'o-Wang.

5. Spink Numismatic Circular for November 1991 contained an article by Vladimir Suchy entitled: The Machine-swuck Manghir of Sultan Mehmed IV from Qostantiniye and Monetary Reform of 1099AH/1687 AD. 6. The following lists have been received:

1 Lloyd Bennett (PO Box 2, Monmouth, Gwent NPS 3 YE, UK) A list of Chinese coins.

11 Lester D Snell (Box 261, Sonoma, California 95476, USA) A list of Chinese coins.

111 R © Senior Ltd., (...) A list of Indian coins of various periods. iv. Stephen Album (PO Box 7386, Santa Rosa, California, 95407, USA) - List No. 81 - A wide range of oriental material.

## Work in Progress

1.  John Deyell is working on a corpus of the coins of the Sultans of Bengal. He hopes to have it ready for publication around the middle of 1992.

11. W F Spengler and W G  Sales are preparing a reference book on Turkoman Figural Copper Coins and their Iconography. This 15 to be published by the Celator press shortly.

11.  The Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies is putting together the decennial bibliography of Indian Numismatics. Authors on Indian coins during the last ten years (or earlier, if previously unnoted are invited to send details to the Institute (P O Anjaneri, Dist. Nasik 422 213, Maharashtra, India). iv. The Bank Al-Maghrib is working on a corpus of Almoravid coinage. - Prof. George Scanlon announces that Supplement III to K. C. Creswell's Bibliography of Islamic Art and Architecture is now in progress. It will include publications up to 3lst December 1990. Publication information on books and articles about Islamic numismatics are welcome, especially those on the artistic aspects on the coinage. Authors and editors should take it upon themselves

to send this information to Prof. George Scanlon, Center for Arabic Studies, The American University in Cairo, P. O. Box 2511, Cairo, Egypt.

## Book Review

Coinage of the Bhonsla Rajas of Nagpur by P 2 Kulkami. Published by the Indian Coin Society, Nagpur and Bombay, 1990. 261pp Illustrated in the text. Hard covers. Price Rs. 200.

The coins of the Bhonsla Rajas of Nagpur are not common 12 the west and indeed they are not readily found in India, except perhaps in the area in which they formerly circulated. They have, therefore, presented a puzzling series to collectors who have

managed to acquire some. Very little has previously been published about them and the Bhonsla coinage was one of the more obscure

and perplexing series of 18th and 19th century India.

With this book, compiled and competently written by a resident of Nagpur, we now have a comprehensive record of the coins issued by the Bhonsla Rajas in their former extensive territory, now comprising part of Maharashtra. The author in researching this coinage, had access to some old and unpublished records and reports of the Nagpur mint lying in the C P Civil Secretariat, Old Records Office at Nagpur. These have yielded much information on the minting activities in the Bhonsla state during the later decades of its existence. Extracts from these records have been produced as an appendix and they make very interesting reading.

Whilst covering the Bhonsla coinage from the middle of the 18th century until 1854, when it ceased, the author has divided the work into a number of chapters giving a brief history of the domain, a listing of the mint towns with information on the coins produced at each, and counterfeit coins. There are also chapters on the various mint masters and the marks they used on the coins, and, for the first time ever, on the many and varied countermarks or shroff marks found on the faces and edges of various coins. The catalogue of coins commences about the middle of the 18th century and there is a photograph of every known type of coin, gold, silver and copper, with accompanying data until 1854. There is also a fairly large section dealing with unattributable copper coins which are found in the former Bhonsla territory.

The book contains a number of illustrations of places, rulers and various officials and two good maps on the inside covers. The photographs of the many coins illustrated are excellent and the accompanying legends are given in Persian script.

Although dealing with one of the lesser known coinages of India, the publication of this book represents a great deal of original research and the author is to be congratulated on adding yet further to the ever-widening knowledge of Indian coinages. The work is well-written and nicely printed and bound. It appears to be free of any serious errors. The price is quite modest and the book is recommended to persons interested in Indian coins of the period. KW

A Rare Islamic Coin of Valencia by Michael Broome Islamic dirhams with the mint name Balansia are scarce. Specimens are known from the Amirids, the Dhu 1-Nunids, the Almoravids, and a single square dirham of the Almohads. The coin illustrated is a dirham of the Dhu \|-Nunid, al-Ma'mun and it seemed of interest to investigate why the king of Toledo, some 200 miles away should be minting in Valencia and why such care should have been taken with the titles and engraving on the reverse in contrast to the obverse and to most other Spanish coins of this time.

The history of the period is complex. The Amirids were descendants and followers of the great Ibn Abi-Amir, known to the westem world as Almanzor. They had established themselves in Valencia in AH412/AD1021 as the Spanish Umayyad caliphate disintegrated. Under the rule of Abd al-Aziz, Valencia prospered and good relations were established both with the caliph of Cordova

and the Christian kingdoms. However, on his death in 452/1061 he was succeeded by his son Abd al-Malik who was a minor. When Ferdinand 1 of Castile and Leon seized the opportunity and attacked Valencia, Abd al-Malik sought help from al-Ma'mun bin Dhu 1Nun. Al-Ma'mun drove off the Christians in 457/1065, but deposed the Amirid and took Valencia for himself. Twenty years later,

history repeated itself with the last Dhu I-Nunid seeking help from Alfonso VI, the king of Castile, who promptly annexed the city.
The Dhu 1-Nunids ruled over an area around and to the east of Toledo and were one of the first of the independent 'Party Kings' to break away from the Umayyad caliphate at Cordova. In 435/1043 Yahya bin Ismail, known as al-Ma'mun, succeeded to the throne and began to build up good relations with the Christian princes, including Alfonso VI. He developed a powerful and stable state and in 467/1074 was strong enough to take control of Cordova. However, he died the same year and his son, Yahya al-Qadir, who followed him, was an incompetent ruler who soon lost Cordova, Toledo and Valencia. Alfonso reinstated him at Valencia but when the Castilian troops withdrew in 479/1086, al-Qadir sought help from the Muslim king of Saragossa who sent an army under Rodrigo deVivar, better known as 81-010, to stabilise the situation. An internal insurrection resulted in al-Qadir's assassination in 485/1092 and El-Cid took over Valencia as his personal stronghold. After his death, Valencia fell to the Almoravids and later to the Almohads but it lost its importance and was eventually captured for Christian Spain by James I of Aragon.

The surviving coins from this interesting time are few in number and mostly present little information of importance. The Amirids minted a number of fractional dinars in base gold, all without a date or mint name. Between 435 and 456 there was also a small series of billon or copper dirhams named to Balansia. The Almoravids struck a series of standard dinars there, and the odd dirham, and a single square dirham of the Almohads has been attributed to Balansia.

The Dhu 1-Nunids were based in Toledo and there minted low grade fractional dinars, mostly without mint or date. Al-Ma'mun followed suit but claimed the title of al-Hajib, the Chancellor or chief minister, as did many of the 'Party Kings'. At first, he was named simply as Yahya, supplemented on some pieces by the title 'Sharaf al-Dawlah' which has been translated at 'Noble of the State'. When he took the name of al-Ma'mun, this alone was used on the dinars, some of which also bear the title Dhu I-Majdayn. His Toledo dirhams, running from 463 to 468 have all three titles. Be

The dirhams he minted in Valencia have been dated to 459 and so come in between these two series. It can be seen from the illustration that the quality of the engraving on the two sides is not equal. The obverse which has the Kalima and Ma'mun's earlier titles, has small, roughly engraved lettering whereas the reverse states in large clear script, 'al-Ma'mun, Dhu I'Majdayn' above an imposing arabesque. This can be translated as 'He of the Two Glories' and probably reflects his control of both Toledo and Valencia. The date on-this coin is either 457 or 459, but unfortunately, a crack in the flan passes nght through the crucial digit. Ma'mun deposed Abd al-Malik in 457 and it seems more likely that he struck coins in Valencia in the year of its conquest rather than delay for two years before announcing the victory with a coin. The quality of the engraving of the reverse and the fact that this specimen is made from relatively high grade silver points to this being a coin especially minted to celebrate Ma'mun's capture of the city. Other coins of this type in billon or bronze have been read as 459, but these could be later issues. If the title Dhu 1-Majdayn was indeed adopted in consequence of the conquest of Valencia, this would provide an indication of the date of the gold fractional dinars with the same title.

## Indravarma and Gondophares by R C Senior

In ONS Occasional Paper No 25 1 asserted that there were several kings using the name Gondophares and that Gondophares I began his reign around the inception of the Vikrama era, making him a contemporary of Azes. The coins that I assigned to Gondophares I included the billon tetradrachms of Gandharan types as well as the Parthian silver tetradrachms of Seistan and the copper tetradrachms of Arachosia. The new chronology that I proposed will need fine-tuning since we do not know the length of the reigns of the various monarchs concerned, but as new evidence is discovered we can fix them more closely within the sequences proven by type development and hoard evidence.

A short talk given at the British Museum recently, in far too short a time allowed, gave me the opportunity to exhibit a rough chronology consequent on my paper, above mentioned, and relating also to the fixing of the Western Satraps dates to the Vikrama era (S7BC) rather than the Saka (78AD). Joe Cribb, whom I hold in the highest esteem, preferred to allocate the billon Gandhara coinage exhibiting the name Gondophares to the king who is mentioned in the Takht-i-Bahi inscription and who probably reigned c. 19-46 AD. Since Joe was the first person to notice the crucial Sases/Nahapana overstrike (which I mentioned in Newsletter 129, published by Joe in Coin Hoards in 1985) and also drew attention to the fact that several kings used the title Gondophares, I feel obliged to reiterate my arguments for placing these coins before the period 19-46AD because they are vital for establishing the chronology of all the dynasties concerned, viz. the Sakas, Gondopharids, Kushanas and 'Western Satraps'.

In the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1978 Prof. H Bailey published a casket with an inscription dated 'in the 63rd year of the Maharaja Azes deceased' (i.e., 6 AD if one accepts that the Azes era and Vikrama are one and the same, as most authorities now do) and referring to "Indravarma the prince, son of the Apraca-raja (king without rival)' This can be none other than the Indravarma, later Apraca-raja himself, son of Vijayamitra and father of Aspavarma. He refers to his mother, wife of Vijayamitra, who was the daughter of Aja (Azes?). Now Indravarma here is not yet king himself, only a prince. Presumably he was of sufficient age to have made this dedication (establishing water cisterns) and was perhaps in his teens or early twenties. Certainly his father, the Apraca-raja must have been in his thirties (at the youngest) at the time of this inscription.

If we take Joe's theory that the billon coins of Gondophares were issued c. 19-46AD and since Gondophares is followed by his nephew Abdagases, who issued an extensive coinage over at least 20 years, until, say 65 AD., chen, if we can show that the earliest that Indravarma could have struck his coins was at the end of Abdagases' reign then we would be left with an absurdity, in my opinion. It would mean that Indravarma remained prince for something approaching 60 years, that his father ruled until nearly one hundred years of age.

I would suggest that Indravarma probably came to power shortly after the casket was inscribed and followed by his son Asparvarma just before the Takht-i-Bahi inscription states that a '"Gondophares' came to power. By looking at the coinage in more detail, we can fix, I think, the rare coinage of Indravarma in a period that is reasonable in relationship to the one positive date of 6 AD

that we know and working backwards show that it is impossible for the Gondophares billon coins to fit the dates 19-46AD. In fact it is most improbable that Abdagases could fit these dates either and one is left seeking another contender. In my Occasional Paper I

suggest Sarpedanes might fit, but I am now prepared to reconsider Sases, successor of Abdagases, as main contender. His coinage is certainly large enough to fit the time concerned; he occupied Gandhara, he used the title Gondophares and his relationship to Indravarma and Aspavarma is such that his reign could reasonably be said to fall within this period. This would make the billon Gondophares (I) tetradrachms c. 30 BC - c. 1 BC and Abdagases c 0 - 19 AD. Indravarma's coinage in his own name would then be around 15 AD.
Prof. Osmund Bopearachchi has catalogued a hoard of coins in the Smithsonian Institute that was found in 'Malakand' and which covers the early part of this period. It will be published shortly, and on the accompanying chart the hoard coins are shown with the line depicted by dots and dashes. One can see that the coins of Sases and Indravarma are absent, and only a very rare variety of Aspavarma's coins are present. This last has Pallas reverse, without star, and with obverse monogram as on copper tetradrachms bearing the name of Azes. Even rarer are the same issue that follows this (not in the hoard) with additional star, and then comes the extremely common series with the same reverse but different obverse monogram. The latter is an extensive series. Aspavarma has no

'Zeus right' series (with king mounted right obverse) and Sases has no 'Pallas' series and it may be that Gandhara was partitioned between these two kings. An extremely rare group of 'king mounted left' /Zeus right, coins are known for both kings, but there is no way of knowing which king came first. A unique coin with new control letters and legend of this type which may have contained a clue was unfortunately destroyed in cleaning. This last type is the only Aspavarma type to carry the Gondopharid symbol apart from his very rare copper drachms of Zeus Nikephorgs type. These latter have a monogram which indicate the they follow Sases' coins of this type which begin in billon with monogram after the Abdagases coins and become copper with monogram changed to The question now is where to place Indravarma in this scheme. Since his coins are copper and identical in design to the posthumous Azes coins with star shown on the chart, this seems the obvious place. They would seem to be among the latest coins in the hoard, at the end of Abdagases' reign. Indravarma's coins are very rare. I know of no more than 13 or 14 in total and this might

account for their absence in the hoard. It is possible, even probable, that the Azes coins of this type were in fact previous issues of Indravarma. The star may be his symbol - on one of my coins it is very prominently placed on the obverse. It occurs later on Aspavarma's most common coins. It seems unlikely that his son would have issued coins before Indravarma. On his Sind coins Sases is stated to be Aspa's nephew. I do not think that this can be Aspavarma, but may be some other relative. Sases is possibly a cousin of Aspavarma, and some of his coins certainly seem to precede those of Aspavarma as shown above. The other possibility is that the Azes Pallas coins with the star may be the issues of Indravarma's father, Vijayamitra, the Apraca-raja. This would place Indravarma a little later and even further away from 6 AD. On some coins of Abdagases, a star or rosette is evident and this may be connected with the Indravarma family since it is virtually contemporary. I am more inclined to think that if Vijayamitra issued coins it would be the Pallas type, bearing the corrupt name of Azes and nandipada symbol.

I have details of two other hoards that include the same coins as the Malakand hoard, one down the the end of Gondophares' reign, the other to the end of Abdagases', but both excluding Sases and Aspavarma. The Malakand hoard would seem to confirm then that Aspavarma come after or at the very end of Abdagases' reign. That Indravarma immediately precedes Aspavarma seems most logical. The question is: how long after 6 AD and his casket inscription was it that Indravarma came to power and how long did he reign?

More pertinent is the question: is there time to squeeze 26 or more years for a Gondophares, followed by c. 20 years for Abdagases, plus 13 years between the inscription of 6 AD and 19 AD, the beginning of Gondophares' reign according to Takht-i-Bahi, before Indravarma came to power? Improbable if not impossible. 1 stick to my original findings as outlined in the Occasional Paper and the chronology as roughly outlined in the accompanying chart. I shall produce a fuller chronology at a later date since I now have more evidence to substantiate my theory.

# ELLE WEEE

GONDOPHARES I POSTHUMOUSLY IN AZES NAME Paras - - "لكايو وا‎

# Bc ZEWS ia ns 1 \* a 15 3 65 (8 6) PALLAS TYPE $$ [5 = $$

# ZEUS RIGHT ° كمي‎ \| el $$ =‏4 $$

## \| كاه من 0 Gq + A TYPES \|‏ ديم نت ل 5

## \| مسمس اه‎ mA mY \| \| \| \| \| \| \| \|

# QR AGDAGASES

| 7 | ١ |
|:--- |:--- |
| ااا‎ |  |
| / |  |
| PRINCE فس ةل معدب‎ |  |
| RARE |  |
|  |  |
| Ww |  |
|  |  |
| YAEL COPPER |  |
| 16 | ١° |

## \|

x A 5 لم ولاه‎ ye 8 3 2 Some 0 /5 \|! RN $$ = $$ A? 5 جد‎ i\| كوه‎ Common Some WIT (: Lo Qo ) o ny r) eas Ae ae SHYT, -WHVE SASES rr ةقكتتدددح‎. TST ASPAVARMA a5 4 & BILLeNS To coPPEed 5 ا‎ 50 SCARCE - - m elie ونس‎ Fr 2.0 38 why? CoE (oMMN حر‎ 0" \|\] زع‎ ne e coplren

1 ةالحدغممف 4 م‎ "AZ, E35 \* ai bane 4,0 4 م‎ 221597, Lol T Corr 6 يا‎ SING

## ren

cf Y VERY EXTENSIVE 1 تساوي من‎ 0 25 م#دمهم ب‎

# AD

# TRANSITION OF GANDHARAN TYCES

# = MALAKAND HOAGD ولكات)‎ ABovE THIS LINE ( 2 net Mm MALAIAN Dd HEBRD
Indian Miscellany 1.  Sultans of Gujerat - Earliest dated coin of Ahmed I. Ahmed I was the grandson of the first Sultan of Gujerat, Muzaffar I (formerly Zafar Khan, governor of Gujerat under the Sultans of Delhi). He ascended the throne on 14 Ramadan 813 (AD 1410), having apparently administered poison to his grandfather.

Muzaffar I does not seem to have struck many coins during his reign (AH 810-13). Two silver tankas are known! and a number of copper pieces weighing around 4.5 grams." In Singhal's catalogue of the coins of the Sultans of Gujerat there is a coin, No 884, attributed to Muzaffar III but which is, on stylistic grounds, clearly a coin of Muzaffar I. This coin weighs just under 9 grams. Both the 9 and the 4.5 gram weights were also current in the Delhi Sultantate for copper coins at this time.

Ahmad I struck a large number of copper coins during his reign (AH 813-46), those dated in the 830's and 8405 common. Some coins are undated. The earliest dated copper coin listed by Singhal is one dated 823 (on both sides!) and weighing 4.5 grams\*. Silver tankas of this ruler are very scarce, the earliest being 828.

The copper coin published below is dated 813, the first year of Ahmed I's reign and weighs 9.05 grams. Diameter 15mm

# Nasir-al-Dunya

\{ ناي‎ wa al-Din لد \['ناطث‎ F حل‎ \| rere Shah Fath 3 - 1 -- ultan uw. J 9 Tal \|

## معز زر بي‎

The Kunya 'Abu'l Fath' occurs on the silver tankas of this ruler but not otherwise on the copper coins. There is no mint town mentioned. At this time, the headquarters of the Gujerat sultans seems to have been Nahrwalah (Pattan). Thus the coin may have been struck there. On the other hand, building work on the new city of Ahmedabad began in 813, and the present coin may have something to do with that event.

1 ONS Newsletter 49 (June 1977) tanka dated 812. ONS Newsletter 58 (February 1979), tanka dated 813.

CR Singhal: Catalogue of the Coins in the Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay (1935), coins 1, 2; coins in the editor's former collection and specimens noted in the British Museum's collection. 3 Singhal: op. cit. coin 21a.

2. A New Sultani of Jahangir - by Dr. B Becker. In the Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, the Mughal emperor Jahangir tells us that he gave orders to strike silver coins heavier than the previous rupees. Two series of such heavier coins were subsequently issued: one series 20% heavier, called jahangiris, the other 25% heavier, called sawais. Both types are well known. Less well known are their halves, called sultanis, and which have hitherto been published for the mints of Ahmadabad and Kabul.

Published below is a sultani from the mint of Agra. It is dated AH 1018, regnal year 4 and weighs 7.08 grams.

The layout of the legend appears to be the same as on the sawais of Agra struck from AH 1017 to 1019. The coins bear the distinctive couplet! Sikka zad dar shahr Agra khusro giti panah Shah Nuruddim Jahangir ibn Akbar Badshah.

"King Nuruddini Jahangir son of Emperor Akbar struck coin in Agra, the refuge of the world."

Lucknow Museum Catalogue, page 21, couplet no 22.

3. Bob Senior has provided photographs of a couple of interesting rupees: A Square Rupee of Ranjit Singh.

All Sikh rupees noted and published to date have had the usual round format. The above square coin is the first of this shape to be noted in the series. It is a coin of Ranjit Singh from Amritsar dated Sv 1873. Apart from its shape, the coin is the same type current in Amritsar at this time. Weight not provided but said to be 'full'.

A Rupee of the Rajas of Nabha. When Ranjit Singh invaded the Cis-Sutlej states in 1807 AD, the Raja of Nabha, Jaswant Singh, sought British protection. Two years later, a treaty was signed by which the British Government granted protection to the rulers of Nabha. Jaswant Singh died in 1840 AD (Sv 1897) and was succeeded by his son Devendra Singh. The latter chose to ignore the 1809 treaty, so that when war was declared in

1845 between the British and the Sikhs, he sided with the Sikhs. When the British emerged from the war victorious, Devendra Singh was dethroned and pensioned off. A quarter of the Nabha territories was distributed equally between the rulers of Patiala and Fadrikot,

and the rest restored to his son Bharpur Singh. Bharpur Singh was installed on the 'gadi' and recognised by the British as Raja of Nabha.

The rupee described below is dated '97', i.e., Samvat 1897 (1840 AD). It is a wide-flan coin bearing most of the legend. As such it is probably a Nazarana issued to mark the accession of Devendra Singh. This attribution is necessarily tentative, as the present coin, like other Cis-Sutlej state coins, does not bear the name of the issuing ruler. It bears the frozen legend of the coins struck by Ahmed Shah Durrani at Sirhind. --- Obv. Ahmed Shah's couplet 'The Command issued from the Incomparable

Creator to Ahmed the emperor, "Strike coin on silver and gold from the Height of the fish to the moon'"

It is interesting to note that this coin actually bears the mint-name Nabha ( ~7U\_), instead of the usual 'Sarhind' ( سس عار‎ ). The weight of the coin is not available.

## The Chinese-Siamese Pee Coins

How the Gambling Tokens became Coins by G Hollink

Introduction Pee coins were intended as gambling tokens issued by private companies, to enable people to stake small amounts of money while gaming. At first their use was strictly limited to the gambling parlours, and the shops adjoining them which were often owned by the same firm.

When people outside the gambling circuit learned that these gambling tokens could fill the long felt want for small change,

and realised they could be redeemed for silver money any time, these "pee" coins as they were called, gradually became accepted as currency (T'ung - Pao ii BE sz جحه‎ ' This process took some time. ty Issuing pee tokens had been proved a profitable business for the firms so they saw a market for their tokens outside the realm of their gambling dens.

Influencing a market. For general circulation the pattern of the tokens needed to be changed, 1.e., to make them recognisable as coins to a larger public. Since only about 40% of the inhabitants of Siam were Chinese, reading the Chinese inscriptions of the tokens was reserved to a small minority and there were still many illiterate people.

So what was more likely to be successful, the issue of imitations of official coins, or tokens having the main features of legal coins? The firms decided to issue imitations and by doing so stimulated and emphasised the use of pee tokens as a currency throughout the kingdom of Siam.

The familiar features of the legal coins were easily recognised on gambling tokens. It made them trustworthy and gave confidence to a much larger public.

The tokens became coins! A certain timespan was involved from the first issues as gambling tokens to their first appearance in the streets. This explains why pee tokens, imitating legal coins, will not be found in the early years of their use, but only after their appearance outside the gambling dens (approximately 1850). Prior to that there was no reason to issue imitations of legal coins: - depictions were drawn from the rich world of Chinese mythology. Their use was in-house and the firms did not have to worry about their tokens competing with those of rival firms. But after the appearance of the gambling tokens as a currency, outside the gambling parlours, it was profitable for the firms to change their tokens to get their share of the market. By issuing more colourful and ingeniously shaped tokens and withdrawing the old ones, the firms tried to outdo their rivals in the search for profit from this 'artificial' money.

By order of the "Hong-concession" the withdrawal of the tokens was to be announced 48 hours before they were to be taken out of circulation, when they would lose their value. The Hong-owners, however, got town-criers to make their announcements during the night, so many a message went unheard. This resulted in those people still having those particular tokens in their possession and who did not hear about the withdrawal, having to bear a loss! Although illegal, it was profitable for the firms which gained twice since they did not have to change the old pees for legal silver and the new series of tokens that replaced the old ones had to be bought for silver too. It was difficult for the government to interfere, since the people had accepted the pees as coins. It was only ended by a decree of king Rama IV on August 25, 1875. In this he prohibited the use of pees as currency because the people rejected the new flat copper coins (struck in England) in favour of the pee coins.

There follows a description of some of the tokens imitating legal coins, and those with the main features of the cash coins.

The imitations of officially minted coins In categorising porcelain pee tokens, I make a distinction between - Cash coins, as a basis for pee coins:

1. Cash coins: imitations of real (existing) cash pieces 2. Cash-type coins: private varieties on the "cash theme" 3. Depictions of cash coins on pee tokens. - Other (officially minted) coins, used as a basis. Note: Among the numerous issues of pee tokens, the imitations of legal coins are important, because they give us information about their dating. We know the dates of minting and issue of the original coins from the mint reports; hence their porcelain imitations can be dated (although not exactly) from the same date onwards. 4.1. Cash coins as basis for pee- coins

The very first token of this kind encountered was the imitation of the Chinese cash coin minted during the reign of the emperor Tsai

- Ch'un, who ruled from 1862 - 1873. This coin bears his second reign title: T'ung - Chi:  12 2 3

## His first title Ch'i Hsiang: it # 71 ¥

was only used in 1862, so this pee coin can be dated from 1863 onwards.

Two values of this type were issued: a salung (V4 baht) figure 1; and a fuang (Ve baht) figure 2.

Another pair of pee coins with T'ung - Chih is in the British Museum collection (figures 3 and 4); 4 is also mentioned by Carl Kainz in his Ostasiatische Porzellanmiinzen (Berlin, 1895)
## \_,

These issues must be of a later date because of the abbreviated script of Pao =F. instead of the official EB:

The successor on the imperial throne was emperor Kuang - Hsii, whose reign was from 1875 - 1908. By this time we can say that the heyday of the pee coins was already over; by a royal decree on August 25 1875, King Rama IV (Mongkut) prohibited the use of pees as currency from 28 November 1875. Even so, an imitation of the cash coin of Kuang - Hsii was issued. This must be dated 1875. I know three different items of this type: a salung and fuang: Kuang - Hsii T'ung Pao (figures 5 and 6); and a fuang: Kuang - Hsii Yiian - Nien (figure 7).  A salung of the latter type may also exist (?)

## be

4.2. Cash-type coins, non-existing cash coins:

Although these tokens are not imitations of real cash coins, they have the same features and bear inscriptions of a type known from

the legal cash coins. Gradually the inscription T'ung - Pao had to move to the reverse of the coin, in favour of the company's name on

the obverse (figures 10 and 11). One main feature, however, is always present: the square or rounded hole in the centre of the tokens. This is sometimes pierced through, or more often, just a relief.

Unlike the official cash coins, these cash-type coins have various shapes: round, oval, hexagonal, octagonal and cross-like pieces. Some examples to illustrate this, all issued by the firm Hsieh - Hsing (Company of the harmonious increase \[of profit\]):

Fig. 8 and 9 Obverse: Hsieh - Hsing T'ung Pao Currency of the Company of harmonious Increase. Fig. 8 Rev. I - Ch'ien, 1 Salung; Fig.9 Rev. I - Fang, \| Fuang. Fig. 10 Obv. Hsieh - Hsing I - Ch'ien, Currency of the Company of harmonious Increase, 1 Salung. Fig. 11 Obv. Hsieh - Hsing I - Fang, Company of harmonious Increase, 1 Fuang. Fig. 10 and 11. Reverse. T'ung Pao, currency. Fig. 12 Obv. Hsieh - Hsing Yin - Ch'ien, Company of harmonious Increase, silver Salung; Rev: Blank (T'ung Pao has gone completely).

Some issues by other firms (also lacking T'ung Pao.):

Fig. 13 Obv. Shun - Hoh Kung - Ssu, Company of Prosperous union;

Rev. Dog of Buddha, Ch'ien, Salung. Fig. 14 Obv. Chung - Chi Kung - Ssu, Company with the trademark of the bell (the bell sign);

Rev. A deer with Ch'ien, Salung. Fig. 15 Obv. Ming - Hsing, glorious increase;

Rev. Ch'ien, Salung. Note the oblong holes of 14 and 15.
Noteworthy is also the coin by T'ung - Ho, with reversed western script incuse on the reverse (fig. 16) A fuang of this type is also known. These cash-type coins may not only bear the company's name on the obverse, but auspicious inscriptions as well, like those on figures 17 and 18.

## val

Fig. 17 and 18 Obv. Wu- Fu San To: the 5 blessings, 3 abundancies. Fig. 17 Rev. Shih - Fén, 10 Hun (=1 salung); Fig. 18 Rev. Wu-Fén, 5 Hun (=1 Fuang). The five blessings were Shou Longevity

Fu Wealth K'ang-Ning Good health Yu-Hao-Té Virtue K'ao-Chung The allotted span: to enjoy life and die a natural death in old age. The three abundancies

To - Fu Much happiness; To Shou A long life; To-Nan-Tzii Many sons.

## 1 Fén, in Siamese "hun" was equal to % of a fuang (Schlegel, Pallegoix).

A.3 Cash coins depicted on pee coins. Although the symbol of two cash coins, inter-twined was more a symbol of good luck than the indication of some means of currency, pieces of this type are worth noting.

The round pees with the inter-twined cash coins are known in brown wax, porcelain and cast bronze. The porcelain pees (figures 19, 20 and 21) have Chin (gold) with the values: Ch'ien (salung), Fang (fuang) and P'ai (pai) respectively

on the obverse, and T'ung Pao (currency) on the reverse.

Since most of the quotation pees come in pairs, I assume a salung like no. 23 exists too.

- Other coins used as a basis for pee coins. Kingdom of Siam: In 1874 the copper series with the crown was minted. This very same design is found on at least three different types of porcelain pees:

Fig. 24: Obverse: Té - Hoh Kung Ssu Fig. 25: Obverse: Té - Shun Kung Ssu Fig. 26: Obverse: Yung - Hoh Kung Ssu These types are thus datable to 1874.
Burma: The design of the Burmese Kyat, 1852 is also found on porcelain pees. The obverse shows the peacock, surrounded by Burmese script; the reverse bears the value: Ch'ien, for salung (fig. 27).

Conclusion. After the first appearance of the gambling tokens as currency outside the gambling parlours, the Hong owners issued tokens for a much larger public, far beyond the gambling circuit. By issuing tokens with those particular features, copied from the cash coins, they created a profitable market for themselves. It made the tokens recognizable as generally accepted coins (T'ung Pao) to a larger public.

Bibliography Abbé Simillien Chévillard: Siam et les Siamois Paris 1889. Gustave Schlegel: Siamesische und chinesisch-siamesische Miinzen, Internationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie Leiden, 1889.

Carl Kainz: 'Ostasiatische Porzellan-Miinzen', Berliner Miinzblatter, Nr. 177 bz 180, Berlin 1895. J A van der Chijs: Catalogus van de numismatische verzameling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunst en Wetenschappen, p. 139 tm 149, nrs.

1 tm 180, Batavia, 1896. Chalerm Yongboonkird: Pee tokens of the gambling farms Bankok, 1971. H P Hofrichter: Siamesische Token Hamburg, 1977

Tokens ex collection: Bataviaasch Genootschap British Museum, London 3,4, 25, 7

Hofrichter Hollink 1; 7; 8. 10). 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,.18;.20; 23; 26 Leeman, Netherlands Staatliche Miinzsammlung, Munich, Germany Tas, Netherlands Terry, Texas, U.S.A. 2, 6,9; 1A

China - The Tang Chi-yao half-dollar Y479 A forgotten variety. by Richard Wright. Kann in his comprehensive catalogue!, seldom missed a variety of a circulated coin. That much-favoured description in modern-day catalogues 'unlisted in Kann' may sometimes refer to an obscure pattern or trial piece, but more often to a modern off-metal restrike or something even more dubious. It is therefore surprising to be able to pin-point a major variety of a fairly common coin which he had overlooked, despite the fact that the variety had been described in print as far back as 1921.

General Tang Chi-yao came to power in Yunnan late in 1915 when that province revolted against the Peking-based Yuan Shihkai regime. Tang alone of all the warlords, was quick to project his image by means of a provincial coinage. A half dollar (Y 480) was produced in 1916, but the bust of Tang in profile did not meet with his approval, and this was superseded the following year by the full-face version (Y.479) (fig 1) which is the more common of the two coins. Production continued at a high rate until about 1919/20; and, contrary to popular belief - seemingly due to a mis-interpretation of data - both types of half-dollars struck during this period were of a high standard at about 850 fine silver. Tang Chi-yao evidently had no intention of projecting his image on a debased coinage.

## ee © ٠ Ors" e ©. ©6.ين‎ ل‎ 629" انني وه‎ ee م6‎. 6

Kann lists a few minor varieties of Y.479, to do with deviations in the style of the Chinese calligraphy, and quotes 'many more variations' of the same type. However, it was Woodward, writing in 19212, who recorded the major variation which was subsequently overlooked. He mentions 'twenty different types' of minor varieties, and then goes on to reveal '...the principal characteristics of Type 1 \[Y,480\] were retained for the first die \[of Y.479\]; subsequently, either new dies were made, or the original one retouched, and if sO, More than once. This is evident at the centre of the military flag, where the lattice-work grcund surrounded by the nine incused spots, which heretofore remained plain, now reveal a distinct ring in relief...'

Examination of the reverses of specimens of Y480 and Y479 does show an unambiguous variation in the centre of the left-hand flag. This was the Military Flag, with the 'dumb-bell' device rather poorly executed on the coins; sufficient to say that the nine outer and nine inner small circles represented the eighteen provinces of China; and that the space in the centre of the design was lightly

'cross-hatched' on the dies of the original half-dollar Y480 (fig. 2). This same reverse was subsequently used for the first issues of the revised half-dollar Y.479; and only later, a 'distinct ring in relief? was superimposed on the hatching (fig. 3). A recent inspection of three half-dollars Y479 shows one with the plain hatched centre, and two with the superimposed ring (as may be seen in fig. 1).

- Kann: /llustrated Catalogue of Chinese Coins USA, 1966 AMTracey Woodward: 'T'ang Chi-yao Coins', The New China Review Hong Kong and Shanghai, June 1921. Y numbers from Krause and Mishler, Standard Catalog of World Coins.

Printed by Galata Print, The Old White Lion, Market Street, Llanfyllin, Powys.