# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. A. Gorter Dr. M. B. Mitchiner UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins

Annual Subscription £3-00; H.FI. 12-00; 5-00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 47 February 1977

North American Secretary Mr. Pat Hogan moved to Florida in January. Please note his new address (listed above). We wish him success as editor of the monthly numismatic journal Coinquest.

Members news. Congratulations to Dr. P. L. Gupta on being awarded the 1977 Silver Medal of the Royal Numismatic Society

in recognition of his many studies in the field of Indian Numismatics. Mr. P. Snartt (572) of Bristol is currently

making a detailed study of East India Company Bombay copperoons (1672 - 1703) and would like any

members who have specimens to contact him. Mr. K. Wiggins (4) has details of some Sassanian coins, Chinese

coins and Singapore merchants' tokens that are for disposal. He would also like to hear from anyone with

surplus Iranian gold coins of the period AD 1848 - 1925. Mr. C. M. Webdale would like to change his interests

to read "Interested in Islamic coins of ALL countries befOre AD 1650, including India'. We are sorry to hear of the death of Mr. K. Jain (224) of New Delhi. Membership of this society is being continued by his son, Mr. R. Jain, who is listed below as a new member. Mr. Jarman (219) of Baltimore has altered his intersts to 'Cash' coins and those of the Malayan states and Netherlands East Indies. Dr. Tarizzo (264) of Switzerland would welcome details of any coins struck in what is now Tunisia between AH 449 and 625. He has only been

able to record seven specimens so far. Mr. M. Broome's paper to the Royal Numismatic Society on Tuesday April 19th. will be "New thoughts on the silver coinage of the Seljuqs of Rum''. Meetings of the Society commence at 5.30 pm. ONS members who do not belong to the RNS and would like to attend this meeting as

guests, and also an ensuing informal supper, please contact Michael Broome. Information sheets

Mr. N. G. Rhodes information sheet (no. 16) on the Coinage of Bhutan is currently being distributed. There will not be an IS in March when the List of Members will be up-dated and re-issued (anyone who is unduly in

arrears will not be listed). Will any member with new material relating to any of the Information Sheets please contact the relevant author.

The striking of Large Silver Coins in 18th. century Egypt by Samuel Lachman, Haifa

The only silver coins struck by the Cairo mint during the 18th. century were paras (or medins), with the exception of the larger

coins of Ali Bey'. At the end of the century larger coins were minted during the French occupation (1798 - 1801).

André Raymond?, quoting Venture de Paradis\*, stated that there existed a regulation forbidding the production of

Piastres or Grush in Egypt and the Barbary States (Tripoli, Tunis and Algiers). Ali Bey struck his larger coins without

authorisation. Bonneville\* wrote that at Cairo the minting of coins other than paras was forbidden and that Ali Bey struck

piastres without permission. Samuel Bernard\* wrote only that the striking of larger coins was not adopted in Egypt, with the

exception of the coins struck by Ali Bey. Stanley Lane-Poole\* did'not mention the matter.

The following significant facts were reported by André Raymond'. In December 1707, when orders arrived at Cairo to

strike Zoltas, the Egyptian Mameluk Emirs refused to execute the order and in the end it was cancelled\*. The same happened in

1716 when a "'hatti serif'? (an Imperial Order) ordered the issue of the new Grush with the Tughra, similar to the ones minted

in the name of Sultan Ahmad III at Istanbul. A meeting of the Emirs at the residence of Abd al-Rahman, agha of the Jamaliyya',

decided to change nothing in the minting of silver coins.

Contradicting all these reports is a silver Beshlik (5 paras) of Ahmad III in the Leningrad Museum reported by Cuneyt Olcer'®.

The reason for the resistance against the striking of large silver coins is not known. André Raymond!! suggested the

following hypothesis. European large silver coins played a major part in the trade of Egypt. The merchants may have feared that

large Egyptian silver coins would not be of the same good alloy as the European pieces and would thus adversely influence

commerce. There was a close connection between the merchants and the Mameluks.
Samuel Lachman, The Coins struck by Ali Bey in Egypt, Numismatic Circular vol. 83 no. 5 (May 1975), 198-201 and no. 9 (Sep. 1975), 336-38.

André Raymond, Artisans et Commercants au Caire au XVIIle Siécle, Vol. I Damas 1973, vide p. 28. Venture de Paradis, French manuscript in the Bibl. Nat., Paris (no. 9135) dated 1787. Pierre-Fréderic Bonneville, Traité des monnaies d'or et d'argent qui circulent chez les différents peuples, Paris 1806. Vide p. 198.

Samuel Bernard, Description d'Egypte. Vol. XVI. Les monnoies d'Egypte, 2nd. edn. 1825, p. 292. Stanley Lane-Poole, Catalogue of Oriental Coins in the British Museum, vol. VIII. Coins of the Turks in the British Museum, London 1883. André Raymond, loc. cit., p. 27. André Raymond's sources were: - a) Al Muhtasar, Arab. manusc. Bibl. Nat. Paris 1855;76b. b) Ahmad Celebi b. Abd ul-Gani, Tarih Misr min duhul il-Osmani ila sene 1150. Yale Univ. Carlo de Landberg Coll. Manuscr no. 3; 44a - 44b. c) Jabarti, vol. I, 33 (He does not say if this refers to the Arabic or the French version). Jamaliyya = Turkish: Gonulluyan (volontiers), one of the cavalry corps stationed at Cairo.

Cuneyt Olcer, Rare Ottoman coins at Soviet Russian Museums (Moscow and Leningrad), Istanbul 1972, p. 38 no. 84 (Leningrad 37193). André Raymond. loc. cit., p. 28. - S. Barron  IRANIAN NUMISMATICS contd. مم Ff ‏NW ني جه بت مه

- L. Rabino di Borgomale, Album of Coins, Medals and Seals of the Shahs of Iran (1500 - 1948), ed. M. Moshiri and reprinted Tehran 1974 by the Iranian Numismatic Institute. pp. viii + 60 in English + 49 in Persian; 54 plates; bibliography; cloth; 550 rials. This is a reprint of the original work published in 1951, together with a biography of Rabino di Borgomale, corrections and an index in Persian. The illustrations are very clear and the book is well bound.

Appendix of forthcoming works (as at early 1976)

## In the "Gold coins of Iran" series: ءنأ‎ 8.٠ \|\| (Coins of Nadir Shah) ' سكدهاى نادر شاه راشفا‎ (Coins of Shah Tahmasp I) شاه طهماسب اول‎ sled\_\_. (Coins of Shah Abbas I) سهفهاى شاه عباس اول‎ (Coins of Karim Khan Zand and the other Zand rulers) iy tts ناسفاسستو ف يسثر‎ 2. glae-S ulobi..

# (Coins of Fathali Shah Qajar) ىاهفس فتحعلى شاه راجاق‎

# Other Gotenborg Publications

(F. A. O. Coins) 5,ىاهك 0 يف‎ (You who collects coins) 0 شما § جم على‎ (Coins of the reign of Reza Shah the Great) ged ols Ls, نارود تنطلس ةأاشتهانش‎ Gled. (Coins of the reign of Muhammad Reza Shah) reek m تنطلس هاائضهاش‎ oly? ol 5 (The Lion and Sun on Iranian coins) قاسيا‎ Gled a thats eS تقش‎ (The Eagle on Iranian coins) نى اراق‎ w نقش باقصع بر‎ (The Peacock on Iranian coins). ا‎ shall لب‎. sic (The Lion on Iranian coins) ad ars مقس سن ب ىو‎ (The Sun on Iranian coins) rs سر 1 ى‎ (Horsemen on Iranian coins) ايرانى‎ gled\_\_. نقش خورشيد بر‎ (The Horse on Iranian coins) نقشس اراكراولس ن بر سكههاى ايرانى‎ (Seals of the Safavid rulers) ىتارسسيا‎ sled:يسسسبأ بر‎ oe (Seals of the Qajars) مبرهاى ياد ناهاش صفوى‎ (Hunting Scenes on old stones) gels ياد نافاش‎ le درهم‎ (Sassanian Seals on Gemstones) ىناتساب‎ ol is نقس \* كار ب‎

# Other publications: - مبرهاى = بر ىابنينن ىتميق‎

Abdalhamid ABOLHAMID and Nasser PAKDAMAN, Bibliographie francaise de civilisation iranienne, vol 2, Tehran University Press, publication no. 1356 / 2. Chapter XI "'L'art, l'Architecture et l'Archéologie"' will have a section on numismatic works, entries 1263 - 1505. Volume I has already been published and comprises chapters I to VII. (finis) Some recent publications Papers

- K. Bajpai, A new silver coin of Skandagupta bearing the date 141, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 72 - Bandyopadhyay, Notes on a British Museum coin of Kanishka, JNSI XXXVIIIi, 1976, 123 - L. Bates, The Arab-Byzantine Bronze Coinage of Syria: an innovation by 'Abd al Malik, pp. 16 - 27 in 'A Colloquium in

Memory of George Carpenter Miles (1904 - 1975)', American Numismatic Society, New York 1976. - K. Bright, More Raiz copper dumps, Numismatic International Bulletin 11, no. 1, Jan. 1977, 21 - F. Chinmulgund, A unique silver coin of Satakarni and Naganika, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 6 - S. Deyell, A guide to the reading of Ancient Indian Coin Legends, part III. Medieval Dev-Nagari, N.I. Bull., Jan. 1977,9

- S. Farid, A new and unique 10 tankah commemorative coin of Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah of Bengal, JNSI (ibid), 88 - S. Farid, The first known coin of Sultan Nasiruddin Mahmud II of Bengal, JNSI XXXVIIIi, 1976, 128 - Francfort, Deux nouveaux Tétradrachmes comme moratifs d'Agathocle, Revue Numismatique XVII, 1975, 19 - 2 - Gobl, The Roman - Kushanian Medallion in the British Museum, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 21
- Gokhale, Ranjangaon Hoard of Kshatrapa coins, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 27

- L. Gupta, On the date of the Horseman type coins of Muhammed bin Sam, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 81 P.L. Gupta, A coin hoard from Kausambi, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 46

- Handa, A new type of Arjunayana coin, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 1

- H. Khare, A report on the Maratha mints of the Peshwa period located at Poona, Chakan and Chinchavad, both near Poona,

JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 102 - Kraneveld, An Atjeh coin re-discovered?, N.I. Bull. Jan. 1977, 18

- Niyogi, Two new coins of Husain Shahi Sultans of Bengal, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 96

V.C. Pandey, Chandragupta - Kumaradevi type of coins and the dual character of Samudragupta's royalty, JNSI (ibid), 58

- Petitot - Biehler, Trésor de monnaies Grecques et Gréco-Bactriennes trouve a Ai Khanoum (Afghanistan), Revue Numismatique XVII, 1975, 23 - 57

- Prakash, Significance of animal motif on Kuninda coins, its symbolic value, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 110 Major F. Pridmore, Penang Tin Pice c. 1800 - 1803, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Feb. 1977, 46 - Rao, Another silver portrait coin of Vasisthiputra Pulumavi, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 12 - Rebello, A Dogni of 1851, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Feb. 1977, 53 - M. Shastri, A note ona  silver coin of Vasisthiputra Pulumavi, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 17 - M. Shastri, Some interesting Kshatrapa Potin and Copper coins from Malwa, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 38 - P. Singh, Coinage of Jishnu of Malwa, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 65 - Simon, Johann Jacob Reiske als Begrunder der Orientalischen Numismatik, KL10 - Beitrage zur Alten Geschichte, Band 58/1, 1976, 211-219

- C. Sircar, Problem of Ancient coins from Assam, JNSI XXXVIII i, 1976, 74 - Widemann, Comments on the Chronology of the Gondopharan Dynasty suggested by some unpublished or neglected coins,

East and West, in press. - Widemann, Contremarques du monnayage Indo-Grec, East and West, in press - N. Wright, China - the Kiangnan 20 and 10 cents of Emperor Hsuan T'ung, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Feb. 1977, 52 - H. Vernon, The coinage of the Sudan 1885 - 1898 (contd), Spink's Numismatic Circular, Jan. 1977, 5 - 8 Books

- B. Coole,  Ch'i Heavy Sword coins and debateable pieces of the Chou era. Vol. 5 of the Encyclopaedia of Chinese coins,

Quartermann Publications, 5 So. Union St., Lawrence MA 01843 (30 dollars)

- B. Mitchiner, Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian Coinage, Volume IX. Greeks, Sakas and their contemporaries in Central and

Southern India: Indo-Parthians, Western Satraps, Chutus, Abhiras, Satavahanas. This final volume is now available (Seaby) - V. Narasimha Murthy, The Coins of Karnataka, 1975: Geetha Book House, New Statue Circle, Mysbre 570 001

Saran Singh, The Catalogue of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei Coins (1700 - 1974), Malaysia Numismatic Society, P.O. Box 2367, Kuala Lumpur 01-02, Malaysia --- "Bomeo Iron Bullet Money"

In answer to the query in the December NL. the following information has been provided by Mr. K. W. Wiggins: -

From 'The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo' by Henry Ling Roth (2 vols. Truelove & Hanson, London 1896): Lt. Mannyat found the Lundu Dyaks ready for barter. The proximity to and influence exercised by Brunei, where a debased iron medium of exchange was in use, would have made it likely that the natives might have known something of a currency but they do not appear to have understood or appreciated it. (Quoted from: Mannyat, Frank: Midshipman HMS. Samarang; Borneo and the Indian Archipelago, London 1848). To this one may add that Millies (p. 157: Les monnaies des Indigénes de l'Archipel Indien et de la Péninsule Malaie, Le Haye 1871) records the use in currency of small bars of iron in Brunei and other parts of Borneo during the 18/19 th. century and also that Gervaise (An Historical Description of the Kingdom of Macasar in the East Indies, London 1701) commented on the importance of iron mining in the Islands, on the fame of Celebes for the superior quality of its iron weapons and on the use of engraved iron bars at marriage ceremonies performed in Macasser.

A Note on the early coinage of the Sultans of Macasser (Celebes) - B. Mitchiner

The following description was provided by the traveller Gervaise in his book 'An Historical description of the Kingdom of Macasar in the East Indies' published in 1701 (London: vide.م‎ 84): - - 'The Piquin is a piece of Copper-money, large, flat and round, like one of our Pieces of Fifteen-sous. There are engraved upon it three or four small Circles, and some Birds, very scurvily drawn; and besides these Piquins have a hole in the middle, that they may be threaded together for the more easie carriage. The Macasarians give the Hollanders a hundred of 'em for one of their Pataques or Reals; and the Hollanders give four Reals, for one Beulentino; which is a piece of Gold-Coyn, round and flat, about the bigness of a Piquin, and is the most ancient Money in the Country'. Regarding the use of such money Gervaise also notes (p. 83) that 'As for the Ladies of Quality, they indeed are exempted from working, because they have a great number of Servants and female Slaves to do the drudgery: Or if they have not enow to do the Business of the House, and to attend 'em when they go abroad, they hire 'em for their Meat and Drink, and two or three Piquins a Day'.

Macasser (Gowa) was at this time an Islamic Sultanate, the ruler having been converted to Islam in 1603 and his realm having followed suit'. A series of Gold coins struck by successive Sultans from that time throughout the 17th. century has been published by Millies?. Macasser was then a prosperous Sultanate, 0غ‎ partly through extensive trade with the Javanese Sultanate of Mataram, and it was still a period when European influence was more commercial than imperialistic. The base metal coinage of Macasser does not appear to have been discussed during the 2% centuries that have elapsed since Gervaise' report. The coin described below may well belong to this class. By analogy with the evolution of base metal coinage on the neighbouring Island of Java one might expect the copper coins described by Gervaise to have been replaced by tin coins during the ensuing 18th. century (cfr. eg. Bantam). By comparison with Celebes' other Island neighbour, Borneo, a rather unusual form of outline engraving of the coin type is not un-expected. The way in which the facing bird is depicted on the coin shown below may be compared with the seated camel (and other animals) encountered on early tin coins of Brunei?.

Sultanate of Macasser: 18 th. century Tin Piquin: 6.2 gm. Obv.: Standing bird facing, crudely drawn

Rev.: Geometric pattern of circles and lines Provenance: Indonesia, acquired with early coins of Bantam and Brunei.

- G. E. Hall, A History of South-east Asia, MacMillan, London 1968. - C. Millies, Les Monnaies des Indigenes de l'Archipel Indien et de la Peninsule Malaie, Le Haye 1871.

- Hanitsch, Tin and lead coins from Brunei, J. Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1908, 111-114. - Singh, The Catalogue of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei coins 1700 - 1974, Kuala Lumpur 1974.

\| > ed