# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. A. Gorter Dr. M. B. Mitchiner UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins

Annual subscription: £2 -00;H. Fl.12 - 00; 5 - 00 dollars North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Newsletter number 46 December 1976 European Secretary

Please note that Dr. Gorter, our European Secretary, has moved house. His new address is given above.

Subscriptions Another reminder that some subscriptions are still due. Note the subscription rates cited in the last newsletter.

| Members news. | Mr. E. Manara (184) seeks information about the modern machine struck Persian gold coinage of the Qajar | dynasty from circa AD 1875 through 1925. Please would any member with unlisted types, dates or varieties, |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| or with information on patterns, contact Mr. Manara. Mr. R. Tye (481) is interested in the 'Tribal' coinage of | Ancient India, especially that of Eran and Ujjain, and would like to enlarge his collection thereof. Mr. N. Nicol | (522) is studying Abbasid coinage in connection with his doctoral studies and seeks information on silver |
| dirhams and copper fals minted during the period AH 132 to 218. Please send as complete a description as | possible and also note Mr. Nicol's new room number. Dr. Domrow (438) is now concentrating on south-east | Asian coins, especially non-European issues (Assam to Annam incl. Indonesia). He is also interested in coins |

or with information on patterns, contact Mr. Manara. Mr. R. Tye (481) is interested in the 'Tribal' coinage of Ancient India, especially that of Eran and Ujjain, and would like to enlarge his collection thereof. Mr. N. Nicol (522) is studying Abbasid coinage in connection with his doctoral studies and seeks information on silver

dirhams and copper fals minted during the period AH 132 to 218. Please send as complete a description as possible and also note Mr. Nicol's new room number. Dr. Domrow (438) is now concentrating on south-east Asian coins, especially non-European issues (Assam to Annam incl. Indonesia). He is also interested in coins

of the Indian Native States and non-cash coins of China and Japan. Mr. J. Phillips (471) is looking for an

original (1926) edition of Kann's book on Chinese coinage. Mr. M. Broome would like to arrange an informal dinner in London after his paper to the Royal Numismatic Society on Tuesday April 19 th. Would anyone interested please contact him.

Queries Scott Semans (80) has recently received a group of

100 pieces of "Borneo iron bullet money"', irregularly

rounded pieces with designs and barbarous arabic inscriptions, weighing 5 to 10 grammes each. Can any

member provide background information and confirm, or otherwise, their use as money?

The following group of medieval Indian coins in the

collections of Mr. C.M. Webdale (87) and S. Goron (217) also require identification. One appears to be

dated (AH) 822. The first coin is billon, the others copper.

Previous requests for the identification of coins have

met with very little response from members. Surely

our society possesses enough expertise and goodwill

to help other members enjoy a better understanding of coins in their own collections. Please send your

comments on coins either to the editor or to the member concerned.
Mr. S. Kumar (351) has a silver coin weighing 5 tolas (57 grams) reading "Maharaja Parthe" and "Bharat Vijaya Singh 1124". Can anyone identify it please?

## Publications

Information sheet no. 15 on the coinage of the Aghlabids by Dr. Tarizzo is currently being circulated. Mr. Rhodes paper on Bhutan is now to hand and will be distributed in January.

Recent papers P.A. Athanassoulos, Greek counterstamps on Ottoman Coins, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Nov. 1976, 417 - 8 and Numismatics ©

International Bulletin X, no. 8, 270-278. R.K. Bright, An unrecorded Jodhpur Mohur, N.I. Bulletin X, no. 8, 278. 1.60. Campbell, Islamic Calendars, N.I. Bulletin X, no. 9, 298 - 306. D.K.E. Ching, A line-count survey for Szechuan 'Han' design minor coinage, T'ung Pao II, no. 2, 1976, 44 - 5 (in press). A.B. Coole, Coole's comments on chopmarks, Coinquest I, no. 6, 2, 6. M.L. Cummings, Japan's World War II One Sen provides example of meaning behind coin designs, Coin World Aug. 11, 1976, 66 M.L. Cummings, Japanumisology, coin designs that didn't succeed, part II, T'ung Pao II, no. 2, 46 - 48.,lleyeD  A ediug  ot eht  gnidaer fo tneicnA naidnI  nioc,sdnegel trap:eno,ihtsoraK.I.N  nitelluB,X.on,9 703 -.‏313,كيل JS. Deyell, ibid. part two: Brahmi, N.I. Bulletin X, no. 11 (Nov. 1976), 371 - 384. S.T. Eisen, The coins and history of the British Occupation of Java during the Napoleonic wars, N.I. Bulletin X, no. 11, 385-8. - Galyan, More fistsful of Thalers, Journal of the Society for Ancient Numismatics VII no. 4 (Summer 1976) -- Maria Theresa

thalers with various counterstamps. The secretary, Beate Rauch, PO. Box 60321, Terminal Annex, Los Angeles, CA 90060. P.D. Hogan, Pronunciation tips, T'ung Pao II, no. 2, 49 - 52.

- Jamgochian, The Orontids of Armenia, J. Soc. for Ancient Numismatics VII, no. 4, 68 - 69. - Plant, Brahmi, Seaby's C & M Bulletin, Dec. 1976, 464 - 468. - Plant, Jenghiz Khan, Seaby's C & M Bulletin, Dec. 1976, 469 - 470. - Pridmore, The Kandahar Fulus or Paisa, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Dec. 1976, 455 - 457. F.S. Robinson, Survey of a small hoard of Honan 50 cash, Y-394, T'ung Pao II, no. 2, 42 - 43. © M.H. Schoberlin and L.S. Ho, Facts scarce about coins of Liu Ch'iu, Coin World, Aug. 11, 1976, 65 - 66. A.M. Simonetta, The chronology of the Gondopharan Dynasty, East and West, in press. R.L. Sweeny, Shabua, N.1. Bulletin X, no. 9, 314 - 317. - Toros, Tigran's crown in Commagene, J. Soc. for Ancient Numismatics VII, no. 4, 65 - 66. P.H. Vernon, The coinage of the Sudan 1885 - 1898, Spink's Numismatic Circular, Dec. 1976, 461 - 463.

Books Kim In-Sik, Hangug Hwapye Kakyeok Torok (Illustrated Catalogue of Korean Coins and PM), Kimhwa Chulpansa, Seoul 1976,

pp. 324. M.B. Mitchiner, Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian Coinage, Volumes 7 (The Decline of the Indo-Scythians: contemporaries of the

Indo-Scythians) and 8 (The Indo-Parthians: their Kushan neighbours) are now available (Seaby, London). Karl Petit, Amulettes & Talismans monetiformes d'Extreme Orient, pp. 88, price 130 Belgian francs (post incl.: by Internat. PO)

from the author at 6 Avenue Reine Astrid, 7000 - MONS, Belgium. Fr. Schjoth, The currency of the Far East: a new reprint is available from Cobham Numismatics, 63 St. John Street, London

EC1. Price £14. Nippon Ginko Chosakyoku (Research Dept., Bank of Japan), Zuroku Nippon no Kahei (Illustrated record of Japanese coins),

vol. 9 (Japanese coins and paper money since 1931), Toyo Keizai Shinposha, Tokyo, 1975: 329 pp.

Mr. W. Berger's book "Ch'ing cash until 1735" has been awarded the Lhotka Memorial Prize of the Royal Numismatic Society.
Public collections of Oriental coins a note from Michael Broome

No comprehensive index exists to numismatic collections in Museums. In consequence numismatists wishing

to study particular series of coins may easily miss important material. Members are invited to send their

Regional Secretaries brief details of any local Museum holding important Oriental collections so that a start

can be made on an International Guide. In parallel with this brief descriptions of any Oriental coins available

in anamed Museum are requested for publication in the Newsletter.
Ottoman Overstrikes on European Crowns by Samuel Lachman

It is well known that many European crowns circulated in the Ottoman Empire before the striking of large Ottoman silver pieces commenced in the reign of Suleyman II (1099 - 1102 H / 1687 - 1691). They continued

to circulate, however, even until the beginning of the 19 th. century. Sultan Mustapha II (1106 - 1115 11 /

1695 - 1703) made an attempt to change the situation. In 1108 H (1698) the demonetisation of the foreign Kurus was ordered. The public was asked to bring these coins to the mint to be re-struck as new Kurus OF

Zolotas. New mints were opened at Edirne, Erzurum and Izmir'. The Turkish Kurus of the time had a weight of 6 dirhem (19.24 grammes). Similar European pieces were the

Dutch 28 stuiver florins. Some of the large European crowns were heavier, ie. 82-9 dirhems (27.25 - 28.86 gm.), or even heavier (Lion Daalders and Austrian Talers). All overstruck coins show on the obverse the well known inscription Sultan al-barrain............ (A). The reverse of the lighter coins is identical with that of the then existing Kurus which became the Zolota (B). The reverse of the heavier coins bore a new inscription incorporating the tughra (C).

# op! سلطا ن

سلطا ن‎ Tughra. شرب فى ىفطمم بن محمد خان و خارقان نيرحبلا‎ Sh ob

# ce \| ةينيطنطسق

دام ملكه ضرب فى ناطلسلا‎ ةينيطنطسق ناطلسلا‎ 1١65 ١ ©

A B The overstriking did not always obliterate the previous inscriptions completely and a number of such overstruck pieces on which the original coin can be more or less identified are mentioned in the numismatic literature and cited here. Artuk 1723? Overstruck 'A' and 'C'

Kurus on Dutch Lion Daalder, perhaps from either Gelderland, Zeeland or Westfriesland.

12155715 ع‎ FOE 811 م‎ -  Rev. DNO.NO....OVETVR. 164 25.70 g. 41 mm. BMC 4793 Overstruck 'A' and 'C'

Kurus on Dutch Lion Daalder. ie. cc 15 68 PRS « cssamcee BEL. \|, ree NS..... D 27.2 g. 41% mm. Lane-Poole writes that this is a Daalder of William I. The rixdaalder of William the Silent has different inscriptions and weighs over 29 g.\* The complete inscriptions of the Lion Daalders of the seven provinces read (some variations exist): - © Obv. MO. ARG. PRO.CON. FOE. BELG................. (name of the province)

Rev. CONFIDENS. DNO. NON. MOVETVR............. (year). BMC 418? Overstruck 'A' and 'B'

Zolota on florin of 28 stuivers of Mathias I 9011 ع 1 111 مو‎ ee TG. م‎ ITA. IMP.............. If this is a 28 stuiver piece of Dutch origin it is from Zwolle (Delmonte 11145, Verkade 174.26 ). The complete inscription of the florin of 28 stuivers from Zwolle reads: Obv. FLOR.ARG.CIVIT. IMP. ZWOL.

# Rev. MATH.1.D.G.RO.IMP.SEM. AVGVS. Kappelhof' Overstruck 'A' and 'B'

Zolota on florin of 28 stuivers from Emden of Ferdinand II.

19.37 g. unc. diam. The identification was made by Kappelhof.

It would be interesting to hear about similar overstruck coins which can be identified.

- Belin, Essais sur l"histoire économique de la Turquie, Journal Asiatique, series 6 (Oct/Nov. 1864), VI, 358 Ibrahim and Cevriye Artuk, Istanbul Arkeoloji Muzeleri Teshirdeki, Islami sikkeler Katalogu, vol. II, Istanbul 1974. Stanley Lane-Poole, Catalogue of Oriental Coins in the British Museum, vol. VIII, Coins of the Turks in the British Museum, London 1883. Zonnebloem, Catalogue van de zilveren munten geslagen door de zeven provincien der Verenigde Nederlanden 1576 - 1795, Amsterdam 1976. - Delmonte, The silver Benelux, Amsterdam 1967. - Verkade, Muntboek, Schiedam 1848. Anton Kappelhof, Emder "'Silbergulden" und "Towenthaler". Jahrbuch 1962 der Gesellschaft fur bildende Kunst und vaterlandische Altertumer zu Emden, p. 160, 21. III no. 7.

نم ريما رن ‏NAN