# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Regional Secretaries General: Mr G P Hennequin

34 rue Georges Louchet 62223 Sainte Catherine, France

Secretary General Europe: Dr H J van der Wiel Mr M R Broome van Beverninghlaan 24 30 Warren Road, Woodley, 2801 AE Gouda, Netherlands Reading, Berks, RGS 3AR, UK

Newsletter Editors UK & Eire: Mr K W Wiggins Mr S Goron & Mr H W Simmons 9 Coldharbour Close, Crowborough 75 Burghley Road, London N8 OQG, UK East Sussex, TN6 181), UK

America: Mr W B Warden, jr. Annual Subscription PO Box 356, New Hope £6.00; H Fl 25; FF 75; 10 dollars PA 18938, USA NEWSLETTER no.97 August - September 1985 From the Secretary~General

In July 1970 we published our first Occasional Paper. It was 'An Annotated List of Books on Coins Published in India 1960-1970' and was written by David Briggs. In the intervening 15 years we have published a further 18 OPs and a total of 26 Information Sheets.

The two series are different. ISs are intended to cover subjects of interest to members in fairly full detail and hence provide reliable references. They are typically 10-15 sides with subjects such as 'The Copper Doits of Banjarmasin' or 'The Coinage of Srinagar in Garwhal 1760-1815' Longer papers are split so that both 'The Early Arab Coins of Tunisia' ana 'The gold and Silver Coins of the Sikhs' came out in 4 parts. Many of the ISs are still the most complete and up~to-date reference available on their subject.

## OPs are more of the nature of working papers, written while a project is still being

researched or dealing with just one facet of a subject, like 'The Peiyang Arsenal Mint' or 'A Trial Listing of the Modern Gold Coins of Ottoman Egypt'. They are very similar to the type of article published in the Newsletter but the extra space available allows more detail to be included.

If you have been studying a subject and feel that you have some results that are not easily available from standard references and which might interest other members, please write to me and we can discuss the best method of publication. Even research that fails can sometimes be worth publishing as it establishes what is already known and helps others

to seek out more profitable lines to follow. Our next OP on 'Seljug Silver Dirhams with Paleologan Countermarks' comes into this category. '

If English is not your native tongue, do not worry, we will amend grammar and spelling if necessary. We will also publish in French or German and can translate papers offered in other languages. Once a clear text has been accepted for publication the paper will appear in less than 3 months, compared with two years or so for many major numismatic journals,

ONS publications are available only to members, until 5 years after publication, anda

complete list was circulated in May 1983, If you do not have a copy ask your Regional Secretary. Back numbers of OPs and 155 are available at a cost of 50 pence plus 5 pence per page (or its equivalent). Michael Broome
# MISCELLANY New Publications 6.

The Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies, Nasik, has recently published

an important book on Indian punchmarked coins entitled Indian Silver 3 Coins: Magadha-Mauriya Karshapana series. This long-awaited work by Terry Hardaker & Dr P.L. Gupta catalogues over 600 varieties, each type illustrated with clear symbol drawings. There is an historical introduction, analysis of the coins, estimate of rarity of types and cross-references with other published material. All this is encompassed within 120 pages, together with 2 maps and 8 photographic plates (300 coins). Copies can currently be obtained from Terry Hardaker (Willcot, 79 Millwood End, Long Hanborough, OXFORD OX7 2BP, U.K.) for £12 plus postage and packing.

The Nasik Institute has also recently published Volume VIII parts I and II (June & December 1984) of the Numismatic Digest. This volume contains a variety of articles on Tripuri coins, Kuninda & Yaudheya coins, early Byzantine solidi from Karnataka, Kanishkas Buddha coins, later Kushan coins, Visnukundin coins, Bengal tankas, Moghal coins, coins of the Gond Kings of Devagarh etc. There is also an introductory article about the institute itself. The volume is available from the Institute (P.O. Anjaneri, Dist. Nasik, Maharashtra, Pin.422213, INDIA) for US$ 15 or Rs 60,

In our last Newsletter we mentioned Leo Mildenberg's new book on the coinage of the Bar Kokhba War, Members will be interested to note that the June 1985 issue of Spink Numismatic Circular contains a review of this book by Ian Carradice of the British

Museum, The same circular also contains the first part of an article by Dr. T D Yih on the Monetary System of China from the Shang to the Ching Dynasty, an article by Hurmuz Kaus On an Indian Exhibition Medal, and a review by Michael Broome of a new book from entitled 'Illustrated Coin Dating Guide for the Eastern World" by Albert Galloway (US $9.95 from the publishers, Krause Publications, Iola, Wisconsin 54990,

# USA).

The second part of Dr Yih's article has now been published in Spink's circular for July/August. Dr Yih has also written to us about the catalogue of an exhibition on the Silk Road that was held a couple of years ago in Bonn, West Germany. The catalogue entitled 'Geld aus China', is some 120 pages long and is apparently still available from the publisher for DM 12,-. Interested members should write to Rheinland-Verlag, Abtei Brauweiler, 5024 Pulheim-Brauweiler, West Germany. Details of contents can also be obtained from your editors.

Other recent Spink Circulars have contained articles by Prashant Kulkarni entitled 'E.I.C. Ek Pai Masa ' (March 85), by James Sweeny on the Legation Medal (a medal produced by the Heaton mint in 1896 for the Chinese viceroy on his visit to the

west), by F. Rebello on some Portuguese Indian coins entitled 'Placing of a Silver Series and an unpublished value', and by Bent Juel-Jensen on 'an apparently undescribed Aksumite gold coin from the reign of King Ezana' (these last three articles appeared in the April Circular).

Warren Schwartz has made available an English language companion to Robert Gobl's "System and chronology of the coinage of the Kushan Empire', This version includes a translation of the main text, the author's principal commentary on the plates and tables plus a brief index to the plates and a German-English glossary of important words. The plates and tables are not included. This English language companion is available for US $50 (post paid) from Mr Schwartz, 1817 Belle Meade Ct., Cincinnati, Ohio 45230, USA.

Dr Mitchiner has published two articles in the December 1983 issue of 'From East and

West' (New Series, Vol.33 nos.1-4). These are entitled:

Hollow handle spades of San-ch'uan (Loyang district): 5th century BC. ii. India: minute silver coins of the early Mauryan Empire.
te An item for members interested in Burmese artefacts: The Tamarind Press (GPO Box 1996, Bangkok, THAILAND) will be publishing a new book on Burmese Lacquerware on 31 July this year. The book will be available in soft cover (US$ 32) or hard cover (US$ 40) from the publishers, Further information available from your Newsletter editors of the publishers, Work in Progress

Prashant Kulkarni is working on a book about the coinage of the Bhonsla rulers of Nagpur. This should be completed early in 1986. The Brand Collection

Friday 14th June saw the auction by Sotheby's of Part 9 of the Brand Collection - Colonial and Indian coins. The original collection, put together by Virgil M. Brand, an American beer magnate, between the years 1889-1926, comprised no less than 300,000 coins from all over the world. Part 9 of the sale contained 238 lots of Indian coinage and a smaller number of lots of Dutch East Indies and other colonial coinage. While a number of important rarities were on offer, the coins that made up this particular sale did not constitute reference material in the same way, for example, as the Pridmore sales had done 3 years ago..Nevertheless Sotheby's are to be congratulated for devoting a substantial part of tis auction to Indian coins of all periods. Prices for mediaeval gold were quite strong while those realised for Sultanate, Moghal and State coins were very much in line with current market prices. The British India series provided the most important coins in this part of the sale with a 1765 gold rupee, half rupee and quarter rupee being knocked down for £8,200, £7,800 and £7,000 respectively. Although a small number of other coins in this series, particularly rare patterns, fetched high prices, prices generally were well under the Pridmore levels. The Dutch East Indies coins sold well, often above estimate, but generally in line with other recent sales involving similar material. Future ONS Meeting

Just a reminder that the next ONS meeting in London will be on Saturday 5th October at the

usual venue of 28 Little Russell Street (near the British Museum), WCl, starting at 2.30pm. One of your editors has been inveigled into giving 'an illustrated lecture on Sikh coins'! The auction at the 4th May meeting realised £51.50 for the ONS and the subsequent sale of 'unsold' items brought in £67.00. The Society's thanks are due to Steve Album and Spink & Son Ltd for kindly donating items for the auction and to Mr John Nisbit for a donation of £10. Members news

Dr Schuster of Vienna would like to correspond with anyone interested in coins from St. Thomas & Prince Islands (Sao Tome e Principe), or in the copper falus of Morocco (cf Craig 120-183).

OTTOMAN 'SQUARE' AKCES - the popular silver coins from the Tunis mint by Kenneth M. MacKenzie

In October 1575 Sultan Murad III issued a firman which renounced the right of the Beys of Tunis to claim tribute from their piratical activities. It provided for the investiture of the Bey, in Constantinople, and among other matters, for the coinage to be stamped with

the name of the ruling sultan. Thus, during the seventeenth or early eighteenth century silver coins were issued by the Dey in the name of the Ottoman Sultan Ahmed bin Muhammad, They were known locally as nasri a name derived from a coin issued by the fourth Almohade

ruler, Muhammed an-Nasr (599H) called nasri moumeni which he named after the first ruler 'Abd al-Mu'mim (524H). This type of coin was widely used in North Africa.

Ottoman nasri were struck by the Dey Yusuf in the names of the Sultans 'Uthman II and

Murad IV. The design was simple. On the obverse of the Murad coin, Sultan Murad b, Ahmed Khan, and on the reverse, 'azza nasrahu duriba Tunus sanat 1033. Similarly Muhammad Laz issued them in the names of the Sultans Ibrahim (1049) and Muhammad IV (1058).

The interesting 'anagram nasri' which the Ottomans referred to as the 'square' akce, bore a unique legend on the reverse, translated as: "Oh! judges of necessities, Oh, sufficient in difficulties" inscribed in maghrebi lettering, in the form of an anagram. The ruler's name appeared on the obverse, Sultan/Ahmed bin Muhammad/Azza nasrahu/bi-Tunus, within a linear border surrounded by a beaded border. The hegira year date was variously inscribed on both the obverse and reverse by the placement of one, two or three ciphers, either at

the bottom angle or centre of the reverse, and preceding the word sultan in the upper part of the obverse,

The attribution of this anagrammatic type to one of the Ottoman sultans named Ahmed has

puzzled numismatists, because the father of the first Ahmed who ruled was Muhammed III

(1012-1026H), and the third Ahmed who ruled (1115-1143H) was the son of Muhammed IV. Ibrahim Artuk (in the Catalogue of Coins in the Archaeological Museum, Istanbul) differentiates the types by stating that the ones with the letter nun at the end of sultan were struck in the name of Ahmed I, whereas those with the letter ha at the end were for Ahmed III. However it seems that most people who have studied the series are agreed that such coins were actually issued in the name of the third sultan Ahmed, and

that the Bey, Husein b.'Ali ceased striking them after the year 11298. (If they were struck in the name of the first Ahmed, then the specimens known woula be for the years 1012-1016H inclusive, plus an additional posthumous issue dated 10278 (i.e. 1603-1618 AD).
'Ali, a new Bey, re-introduced the anagrammatic type after an interval of twenty two years, when he struck them in the name of Sultan Mahmud I, in 1150H and 1151H. They were unusual in that the hegira year date was fully inscribed on the reverse, (If the original type were struck for Ahmed I, then this event would have occurred 119 years after

the last known issues, which seems unlikely.) The square style of "akce was still popular in the time of Sultan Selim III. A Specimen is known with the date 1216H (1802 AD) and later, other types in debased metal with a very simplified design were struck in the name of Sultan Mahmud II with the dates, 1228H and 1229H (1812-13 AD). A\_SIAMESE AMULET? by M. Robinson

On a recent trip to Thailand I purchased the following curious metal object from a Bangkok coin dealer:-

18.54 gm, 38% lead, 62% tin, obtained by X-ray fluorescence at the Oxford Research Lab for Archaeology& History of Art.

Obv: crocodile to left within border, dots outside ) in high Rev: terrapin. or tortoise? within border, oblique lines outside ) relief

Th@ dealer's suggestion was that it was a gambling counter but I consider this unlikely as

it is so different from the well known Thai porcelain gambling counters. In addition there is no writing or mark of value. At first I thought it might be some kind of animal money such 35 was used in the Federated Malay States in the mid 19th century \[1\]. Tin model crocodiles, some seven inches long and more, were used 35 money, and there was also the "tin hat" currency;. Hence unusual shapes have been used for trading in the North Malaya area, but nothing like this has been reported before.

Another possibility is an amulet, presumably to guard against crocodiles. It would most likely have originated in Thailand or Malaya and is not of recent manufacture. If anyone has any definite information I would be interested to hear of it.

\]1\[ R.C. Temple, "The obsolete tin currency and money of the Federated Malay States", Indian Antiquary no.42 (1913).

# A\_HEAVY RUPEE OF JALNAPUR by Stan Goron

Jahangir's so-called heavy rupees are well known to students of Moghal numismatics. They were struck at a number of mints and to two different weight standards: the Jahangiri, weighing around 13.5 grams (i.e. 20% above normal rupee weight) and the Sawai, weighing around 14-14.4 grams (i.e. 25% above normal rupee weight). The mint of Jalnapur is known only from the coinage of Jahangir, and then only from rupees of normal weight standard

i.e. 11-11.5 grams, Two types of these rupees are known (see KM 141.6 and KM 149.11 in the South Asian Catalog, Krause Publications), the first of which is scarce, the other rare, Most of these coins do not bear a date, but coins dated 1014H and 1015H are known,

The subject.of this article is a Jahangiri, weighing 13.5 grams, struck at Jalnapur. Apart from the weight, it is identical with the more usual type of rupee from the mint

(i.e. KM 141.6). There is no date on the coin, Obverse Reverse Kalima and غان

# qS \|‏ كر نلاجه ور

# لور الى ‏pc

Jalnapur is identified with the town of Jalna, located 39 miles east of Aurangabad, In Akbar's time it was held in jagir by one of the Moghal generals. Abu-1l-Fazl, the historian, lived there when in exile from Akbar's court. Thereafter it must have remained a place of some importance. A fort was built there in 1725 and in the nineteenth century the British stationed a cantonment nearby.