# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

Secretary General Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome General Section: Mr. G. P. Hennequin

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. M. B. Mitchiner,

UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins Annual Subscription £4-00; 11.11. 18-00; FF. 48-00; 9-00 dollars North America: Dr. Craig Burns Newsletter number 77 April 1982 Members news

Please note that our Treasurer, Vic Brown,.... Mr..., has acollection of Chinese coins that includes a

board mounted with 131 specimens of coins ranging from the Chou to the Ming period. It has a label that originally read 'from the collection of Dr....- Shanghai' and was then altered to read 'from the collection of.... Mr.... would like to hear from any member who can shed light on the identities of these two earlier collectors. He may, at some time, be parting with his collection. Mr.... of Bedford is parting with a number of Oriental coins of many series.

There will be no Information Sheet or Occasional Paper for March or April, but a revised List of

Members will be circulated shortly. The numbering of Information Sheets has become incorrect. Members should re-number their copies as follows: -

No. 22 Tarizzo, Early Arab coins of Tunisia - the Hafsids No. 23. Goron and Wiggins, The Gold and Silver coinage of the Sikhs: Part One: Amritsar Mint No. 24 Goron and Wiggins, The Gold and Silver coinage of the Sikhs: Part Two: The Mints of Lahore and Multan
Four new coins of the Mrohaung Dynasty of Arakan by M. Robinson

Arakan is the region of Burma bordering Bangladesh on the north, and stretching to the Bay of Bengal on the western coast. Prior to its conquest by Burma at the end of 1784 it was an independant monarchy, frequently at war with the surrounding states. From 1430 to 1784 the capital was at Mrohaung, 45 miles NE of Akyab.

The kings of Arakan struck silver coins of around 10 gm. weight from the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century right up to the Burmese conquest of 1784. Originally these coins almost invariably bore the Kalima on one side and the king's Moslem name on the other, both in Persian Kufic script. From about the mid sixteenth century a series of small coins of approximately 2.5 gm. was struck at Chittagong, control of which

was continually contested with Bengal. Some are attributed to Min Bin (1531 - 53).

Starting with Naradibbati in 955 BE (AD 1593: for AD dates add 638), the coins had the king's Burmese and Moslem names in Arakanese on the obverse, and possibly the same in Persian and Nagari letters on the reverse, although the Nagari is virtually impossible to read. Naradibbati's Moslem title was Sawleim (Salim) Shah and was used for the benefit of the Mohammedans of Chittagong.

This practice was continued by his successor Waradhamma Raza (Ushaung or Husein Shah), 974-984 BE. However the next ruler, Thirithudhamma, 984 - 1000 BE, issued a coin dated 984 which has no Moslem title, although the Persian and Nagari legends remain. He delayed his coronation until 23rd. January 1635, at which time he issued a coin with the date 996. Details are given in Maurice Collis's book 'Land of the Great Image'

\[1\]. He reports that after the coronation Thirithudhamma returned to the state apartments and with his

queen threw down specially minted coins for the people assembled in the courtyard below.

A drawing of the coin belonging to Dr. Domrow was included in my book with Lewis Shaw \[2\] but we now have a photograph, which is shown below. The transcription is to modern Burmese.

66 wv Obv. & Rev. 996 Hs- ١.\> x ve (-in) ni thakhin hsin (Domrow 10.21 gm) la byu thakhin Maha rt IDX 9 ردن‎ Thirithudhamma ه‎ 6 57د‎ Pan) 2 Raza

## Te &

\_ "1634/5 AD. Lord of the Red Elephant, Lord of the White Elephant, Great Thirithudhamma, King"

' This coin is the first to have an inscription in Arakanese only, the same on both sides. This style was followed for all the succeeding issues, including Bodawpaya's conquest coin of 1146 BE. Chittagong was lost to Arakan for good in 1666, becoming part of the Mughal Empire, but possibly control was rather tenuous even earlier and so the Moslem title and Persian/Nagari legends were gradually abandoned.

In 1979 a Burmese text entitled 'Arakanese Coins', by the late San Tha Aung \[3\], was published in Rangoon. This excellent book has new material on both the Chandra and Mrohaung dynasties, and the 56 plates contain several coins not published previously. All the coins from \[2\] for the period 1000 - 1144 BE

are listed, but not the 996. In addition there are two new types described; a coin of Sanda Wimala dated 1062

and a second variety for Thamada dated 1144. The illustrations for these coins are reproduced below as given in \[3\]; larger than actual size.

Ref. \[3\] Plate 40 weight unknown diam. probably 29 mm
The legend reads "1062 Shwe nan thakhin (Lord of the Golden Country) Sanda Wimala Raza''. Sanda Wimala ruled from 1062 to 1068 BE at a time of great unrest in Arakan, when many kings were assassinated.

In 1068 he fled to West Bengal where he died. No coins of his have been published previously, and only one example is illustrated in \[3\], possibly from a rubbing as the quality is rather poor.

The other new coin shown is of Thamada, the last king of the dynasty (1144 - 46 BE). The coin with the legend "1 144 Shwe nan thakhin Maha Thamada Raza" is well known (7.37 of ref. 2), but three specimens of a new type, with the same date but different legend, are shown in \[3\]; and one of them is reproduced below (enlarged). There are minor variations between the three, as is usual with Arakanese coins. Ref. \[3\] Plate 53 (3 coins) weight 10 gm diam. 28 - 29 mm.

The reason for the second coin is given in \[3\] which says "'In his first issue the coin bears the inscription 1144 Shwe nan thakhin Maha Thamada Raza. As the ministers advised him that it was unsuitable to use the title of Thamada he changed his name and helda second coronation in 1 146 with the new title of Agawponyazaw Raza, and also issued another coin. According to the Arakanese chronicles this coin bears the inscription 1144 Shwe nan thakhin Agawponyazaw Raza, which means that the second coronation was held in 1144 BE, and not in

1146; or else he must have back-dated the coin." The change of name didn't however bring Thamada any luck,

as Arakan was conquered by Bodawpaya soon afterwards.

Finally, on further examination of the Manchester Museum specimen of RS 7.40, that is the Bodawpaya 1146 coin with ornate border of dots and lines, I find that it differs as regards the border from that shown in our book. The coin illustrated there would have approximately 25 dots around the circumference (some are worn), but the Manchester coin has 38. Its diameter is 34 mm, and the enlarged photograph of one side is shown below.:

1146 Era, Amarapura, Kingdom of the 1146 Khu owner of many white elephants Amarapura (Shin = owner: Thakhin = Lord) Hsin byu mya - Manchester Museum: 10.4 gm  shin naing ngan

The coin dated 1062 BE will be given the Robinson-Shaw catalogue no. 7.25A, the new 1144 the no. 7.37A and the new 1146 will be 7.40a. With this supplement it is hoped that we now have a complete listing of all Arakanese coins issued from 996 to 1146 BE, but this is probably a pious hope for Burmese coins. There have in fact been rumours of a coin dated 1107, but no firm evidence has been produced.

1.  \*'13120 of the Great Image", Maurice Collis, published by Faber and Faber, 1943 a "The Coins and Banknotes of Burma'', M. Robinson and L. A. Shaw, published by the authoers, 1980 3.  \*'Arakanese Coias'', U San Tha Aung (in Burmese), Rangoon 1979 An English translation is now available: see list of publications in this newsletter. Some recent publications

Acharya, K., A note on Ganga Fanams, J. Numismatic Society of India 1980, 31 - 32 Aves, W. A. T., Inconsistencies of the Victorian silver coinage in the Imperial series of British India, Seaby's

Coin and Medal Bulletin, Feb. 1982, 50 - 52 Bajpai, K. D., The Mitra rulers of Mathura, JNSI. 1980, 1 - 5 Bergman, W., The background of the Hong Kong dollar, 1866/68, Numismatics International Bull., Dec. 1981, 359 - 363 Bhattacharjee, J. B., A silver coin of Jayantia, JNSI. 1980, 136 - 137 Bivar, A. D. H., Gondophares and the Shahnama, Iranica Antiqua, XVI, 1981, 141 - 150 Broome, M. R., Maria Theresia Talers in South East Asia, - Malaysia Numismatic Society XIII, no. 5, Dec. 1981,1-2 Buttrey, T. V., Johnston, A., MacKenzie, K. M. and Bates, M. L., Archeological Exploration of Sardis, mgr.

no. 7: Greek, Roman and Islamic Coins from Sardis, Harvard University Press 1981. pp. 274, pl. 10, case bound, 30 dollars
Chowdhury, V. and Ray, P., Hitherto unknown Surya type coin issued by Sultan Fath Shah of Bengal, \| JNSI. 1980, 42 - 44 Chowdhury, V. and Ray, P., A curious quarter pagoda of the East India Company, JNSI. 1980, 53 - 57 Cribb, J., The introduction of European style coins in Cambodia, Seaby's C & M Bull., Feb. 1982, 45 - 50

and March 1982, 86 - 94 Cribb, J., A new coin of Vima Kadphises, king of the Kushans, pp. 29 - 37 in Festschrift for Prof. B. Trell,

edd. L. Casson and M. J. Price, New York 1981 Deyell, J. D., Re-attribution of the Bull-type billon coin of Khusru, JNSI. 1980, 33 - 35 \| Eimer, C., An Indian Native States portrait, Seaby's C & M Bull., Feb. 1982, 44 - - Farid, G. S.,  Shamsabad: a new mint of Yusuf Shah in Bengal AH 879 - 885/ AD 1474 - 81, JNSI. 1980, 36-1

Gabrisch, K., Rare and unique coins of the Malla kings of Patan, NI. Bull., Jan. 1982, 9 Gabrisch, K. and von Kleist, Ch. E., Munzen aus Nepal, Die Munze XII, 1981, 47 - 48 Gabrisch, K. and von Kleist, Ch. E., Drei unbekannte Nepalesische Munzen von Nripendra Malla und Parthivendra Malla, Die Munze XII, 1981, 15 - 17

Ghosh, K., A new East India Company token, JNSI. 1980, 49 - 51

Ghosh, N. C. and Ismail, K., Two foreign gold coins from excavation at Kudavelli, District Mahabubnagar,

Andhra Pradesh, JNSI. 1980, 11 - 17 Gokhale, S., Two Lion type coins of king Satavahana, JNSI. 1980, 6 - 10

Handa, D., A new commemorative medal, JNSI. 1980, 138 - 139 Hawkins, R. N. P., An unpublished token of Matacong Island, Sierra Leone, Spink's NC., Feb. 1982, 6 Hebert, R. J., A coin of the Menteshe-Oghulari: Muzaffar al-din Ilyas, NI. Bull., Dec. 1981, 374 - 377 \| Hennequin, G., Notes de lecture, Annales Islamologiques XVII, 1981, 401 - 406 Hennequin, G., Esquisse d'une Histoire Monétaire de l'Egypte Préislamique, Bull. de la Soc. d'Archéologie Copte XXIII, 1981, 43 - 71 Krishna, C., A new addition to the Kshatrapa hoards from Vidisha District in Madhya Pradesh, JNSI. 1980,

25 - 30 Lahiri, A. N., Religio-mythical bearing of the representation of Zeus of Indo-Greek coins, JNSI. 1980, 58 - 65 Lahiri, B., Complexities in the study of Early Medieval coins of Northern India, JNSI. 1980, 74 - 94 Mani, B. R., Kalimata Rama Tanka: a new type, JNSI. 1980, 143 - 144 Mishra, V., Panam: a mode of currency in the Medieval Deccan, JNSI. 1980, 106 - 109 Mochiri, M. I., A Pahlavi forerunner of the Umayyad Reformed Coinage, J. Royal Asiatic Society, 1981, no. 2, 168 - 172 Mukherjee, D., A note on a new gold coin of Jayavarman, JNSI. 1980, 21 - 24 Munzel, K., Biographie und Bibliographie Dr. Paul Balog anlasslich seins 80 Geburtstages, Jahrbuch fur Numismatik und Geldgeschichte XXX, 1980, 97 - 102 Murthy, M. S. K., The first Nolamba coin, JNSI. 1980, 130 - 132 Patnaik, S., Numismatic data in the Madalapanji (Jagannath Temple Chronicle), JNSI. 1980, 101 - 105 Phukan, J. N., A newly discovered coin of Siu-Ngeu-Pha Ngan-Mong, JNSI. 1980, 52 - 54 Prabhu, M. M., A gold coin of Samanta Kesari, JNSI. 1980, 127 Ramayya, S., A note on Kalabhra Kootran's coins, JNSI. 1980, 18 - 20 Rebello, F., A 2 - Tanga piece of 1641 with effigy of St. John, Spink's NC., Feb. 1982, 8 Reddy, V. V. S., A gold coin of Sadasiva Raya, JNSI. 1980, 128 - 129 Robinson, M., The World War II Japanese coins for Burma, Malaysia and Indonesia, Spink's NC., Feb. 1982,

7-8 Ruparel, J. J., The use of Indian Coinage in East Africa, NI. Bull., Feb. 1982, 47 - 50 Sahoo, A. C., Saivism as reflected on the gold coins of the Nalas, JNSI. 1980, 110 - 112 San Tha Aung, Arakanese Coins (in Burmese) 1979. An English translation by Aye Set in available from Dr. M. Robinson (31 Priory Road, Sale, Cheshire, England), pp. 66, pl. 56, tables 6: xerox, £6 - 75 Shastri, A. M., A terracotta proof piece of the silver coin of Vasisthiputra Pulumavi, JNSI. 1980, 115 - 117 Shukla, K. S., A unique gold coin of Bhanugupta and Prakasaditya, JNSI. 1980, 120 - 126 Siddiqui, A. H., Copper coins of Nizam Shahi rulers of Parenda Mint, JNSI. 1980, 45 - 48 Siddiqui, A. H., Some Horse type coins, JNSI. 1980, 118 - 119 Sidi, F. K., Coins of Fatimid Ismaili Imams, ILM., VII no. 3, Dec. 1981 - Feb. 1982, 13 - 17 Singh, A. N., Historical antecedants of economic plants as visualised in Indian Numismatic evidence, JNSI.

1980, 98 - 100 Singh, O. P., Social aspects of art in early Indian Coinage, JNSI., 1980, 66 - 73 Srivastava, A. L., Four silver punchmarked coins from Allahabad, JNSI. 1980, 113 - 114

Vaidya, D. K., A note on Kutch coins, JNSI. 1980, 133 - 135 Whyborn, R. E., Commemorative coins of the Islamic Republic of Iran, NI. Bull., Jan. 1982, 20 - 21 Yadav, J., Numismatic data in Prakrit Katha literature, JNSI. 1980, 95 - 97 Yamamoto, T., Kanei Tsuho varieties, NI. Bull., Nov. 1981, 343 - 345