# ORIENTAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY

General Secretary Regional Secretaries Mr. -  -  Broome UK. and Eire: Mr. K. W. Wiggins

Newsletter Editor Europe: Dr. A. Gorter Dr. M. B. Mitchiner North America: Mr. P. D. Hogan Annual Subscription:

UK and Eire £2-00: other currencies £240 Genera! Section: Mr. C. M. Webdale Newsletter number 42 ١ April 1976 New United Kingdom Secretary

Ken Wiggins has now taken over as regional secretary for members living in the United Kingdom and Eire. The Society is very grateful to Brian Buckle who has been looking after this section for the past six years. Hopefully he will now have more time to devote to his own collection. © Members news.

Professor Kouymjian (515) has extended his interests to Medieval Islamic and Armenian coinage; Mr. DeShazo (175) has restricted his to Arab-Sassanian and East Asian coinage. Mr. Ching (121) is now interested in

Chinese coins from Ancient to Modern periods, including errors in machine struck coinage and forgeries; also

in the coinage of Manchukuo and Japanese invasion money (by plate numbers for paper). Mr. Gnatt (272) is

interested in all Islamic coinage and in India and Indonesia back to the Hindu period. Mr. Walker (270) is

studying the figured bronze coinage of the Turkomans and is also interested in Bactrian, Indo-Greek and ancient north Indian coins. Dr. Gear (146), whose change of address was noted in the December NL., seeks to

exchange details and infOrmation on currency weights of SE. Asia, particularly Arakan, Assam, Lannatai, Ayuthia, Cambodia and Yunnan. He also wants to know when coinage was introduced into Yunnan.

Ingrid K. Smith (434) of Toronto has been appointed to the permanent instructing staff of the counterfeit

detection seminars held in selected North American cities by the Organisation of International Numismatics. Ted Banning (512) of Grafton, Ontario, has been appointed to the publication committee of the Ancient Coin Society of Canada.

We record with regret the recent deaths of three members, Mr. Watson (246) of London, Mr. Mandel (52) of Florida and Mr. Husch (125) of Dortmund. Mr. Watson shared his interest in a wide range of coinage with his wife and together they were better known to many ONS members as 'John Copperman' coins. Mr. Mandel was O born in New York City on October 9th. 1912 and died of heart failure at his home in Coral Gables, Florida,

on February 17th. He will be remembered for his work on Korean Numismatics, including the Cast Coinage of Korea (Western Publishing Co. Wisconsin 1972) and a Trial listing of Korean Charms and Amulets. At the time of his death he was working on a comprehensive catologue of East Asian charms and amulets for the University of Hong Kong, in collaboration with Dr. F. A. Turk (23), Mr. J. Cribb and others. Mr. Husch has

been a strong supporter of the Society since he joined and has been generous in his donations. Apologies to Mr. Chahal for mis-spelling his name in the February NL and to Charles K. Panish whose second

paper cited should have been listed as:- Charles K. Panish Praq Prasat, Cambodia's first National Currency.

Occasional Papers A paperon Republican 20 cent pieces of the Manchurian Provinces by Richard Wright will be circulated shortly

Newsletter Dutch members of the ONS had a meeting at Dr. van der Wiel's (118) house in Gouda on Feb. 28th. One conclusion was a general desire that the scope of a regular newsletter be broadened to include short articles,

notes on new coins of general interest and perhaps an arrangment for answering queries regarding coin identi-

fications and other requests fOr information. Other ONS members have re-inforced the view that the

specialised material in our admirable series of Information Sheets needs supplementing by short commentaries

embracing a much wider field of numismatics in order that more members can obtain reading in their own fields of interest.
These views call for comment, both theoretical and practical. On the practical side the economic length for a newsletter is either

the size of this one (A4 x 4 pp.) or twice the size. The present size can be financed by the current subscription but a larger size requires more money. On the other hand, what would members like? Those who would like to read short articles should also be prepared to write comparable articles for others to read! Please will members send their views either to Michael Broome or to myself. If you have commentaries or queries suitable for inclusion, please submit. In order to start the ball rolling this newsletter includes a translation of a 17th. century view on Chinese currency and two coins for identification.

World of Islam Festival 1976: Colloquium on Islamic Numismatics. A personal appraisal by Tony Webdale.

For those students of Islamic Numismatics like myself who are normally in a minority at general numismatic gatherings, this colloquium was a notewrothy event for meeting fellow enthusiasts from far and near, for meeting those with whom one has hitherto only exchanged letters, and, indeed, for becoming acquainted with eminent authorities whose books and articles may not only have significantly furthered our knowledge, but even inspired us to take up our interests in the first place.

When, however, one can meet all these categories of people at the same time, under one roof, with the added bonus of

discovering new friends, the event is without parallel. For me, and I am sure, for everyone else there, the Colloquium held recently in London was just such an event. There was sufficient time during the two day programme for us all to become

acquainted with one another and this was augmented, thanks to the kind hospitality extended to us by Michael Mitchiner and

his family at his home, three days later. \| am sure that many channels of contact were opened and lifelong friendships formed on

those occasions. My sole regret was that I did not succeed in meeting and talking with every person there, but since there was so

much common ground between us all, perhaps even a whole week would not have been sufficient.

As it is hoped that the Colloquium papers will be published in the near future, no comment on their contents need be

made here. Suffice it to say that all the contributors deserve to be congratulated for their standard of presentation and depth of

research into their subject. Particular credit belongs to those non native English speakers who coped so well with our language,

especially with some of the involved discussions following their papers. If the quality of these papers is typical the future of research in this field looks promising.

Our society played a prominent part in the Colloquium. Many of the speakers and of the audience are ONS members and it is hardly surprising that our founder, Michael Broome, was on the Colloquium Organising Comittee. I know that I speak for

all of us in assuring him and his co-members, as well as those who helped to run the proceedings, that their hard work was well

worth while and created a landmark in the research of our subject, as well as an enduring memory for all participants. Our

thanks must also go to the School of Oriental and African Studies for providing such excellent facilities during the two days.

Many of us will endure discomfort in the pursuit of our interests, but it made the event that much more enjoyable to be able to meet in such pleasant surroundings.

A Note on the use of coinage in China during the 17th. century AD from: Relation du voyage des Indes du Sieur de Mandelslo, transl. into French by A. de Wicquefort, Paris 1659.

(page 486) It is only in the sole province of Chekiang, that a coinage in copper is permitted: in all the rest of the Kingdom one only sees gold and silver, which one only receives by weight, without having regard to the mark: and this is why there is hardly

any Chinese merchant, who does not carry with him a scales and silver weights, for weighing that which they are going to

receive. At that time China was (p. 468) 'divided into fifteen large provinces; of which six, namely Peking, Shantung, Kiangnan or

Nanking, Chekiang, Fukien and Kwangtung, are maritime, and the nine others are mediterranean (sic.). Of these nine last, those of Kwangsi, of Kiangsi, of Huquang, of Honan and of Shansi, are the most advanced towards the north, and those of Shensi, of

Szechuan, of Quicheu and Yunnan towards the south. She has beyond those towards the east those of Leao-tung and Korea; but

these are not properly part of China. Among these one counts 145 principal large towns and 1,273 mediocre; which can

nevertheless pass for good towns: because the difference in Chinese names 'fu' and 'Cheu', which they give to their places only

proceed from the qualities of those who govern them. For one names 'fu' those places which have a Governor in Chief, and

\*'Cheu' or 'Hien', those which only have a simple Mandarin; although the ones are often as large as the others.

What is it? Mr. Koelma (132): AE 47.8 gm. Dr. Mitchiner: Zinc 73.4 gm. Dr. Gorter suggests a legend resembling: A Thai 'broken bracelet' (C'ieng) of Lannat'ai. Designs Alef (= 1) le David Melech. struck onto a cast blank. The city name (C'ieng........... ) is un-familiar. Can anyone read it? --- Papers published recently.

Near and middle east - N. Arakelian, Dramner (Coins), Hin Artashat (of Ancient Artaxata) Yerevan, Armenia USSR 1975, pp. 44 (49 illus.). In

Armenian: 1971 excavation finds, Seleucid to Roman periods. Reported in the Armenian NJ.

Henri Arroyo, A new Multiple Dirhem of Medieval Afghanistan, Seaby's Coin & Medal Bulletin, April 1976, 111-2. - 5. Barron, A silver % dirhem of the Ilkhanid Abu Sa'id, 716-36 AH / 1316-1335 AD, Spink's NC, April 1976, 148-9. Wendy Heller, Gold coinage for the Caliphate, World Coins V, March 1976, 36-7 (illustrated and with discussion of the reform of 'Abd al Malik).

Patrick D. Hogan, A listing of Islamic dynasties, Numismatics International, March 1976, 89-95.

Samuel Lachman, The silver coinage of Selim III, Spink's NC. March 1976, 96-7.

Kenneth MacKenzie, A Greek counterstamp used on Ottoman coins in the Sanjak of Serres, Spink's NC. March 1976, 92. Kh. A. Mousheghian, The origin and development of the monetary circulation in Armenia, V th. century BC - XIV th.

century AD, Armenian NJ. March 1976, 2-5 (in Armenian and English: to be continued). Kh. A. Mousheghian, Sasanian yev vaghbiuzandakan dramneri shrchanarutiune hayastanum, Handes Amsorya V, 88, 1974, 335-350, 505-520 (Sassanian and early Byzantine coin circulation in Armenia). - T. Nercessian, Paper notes of Armenia (contd), Armenian NJ. March 1976, 9.

- Toros, Tigran's tetradrachms, Armenian NJ. March 1976, 5-8 (reprint from Soc. for.عمط‎  Num. July 1970). India

- Arumugam, Tamils leave numismatic heritage,  World Coins, March 1976, 126-7; 130-2; 136-7; 140 (with map & illus.).

Richard K. Bright, Bundi and Kotah coins, Numismatics International, March 1976, 83-88

Major F. Pridmore, South India: Arkat 1/Sth. rupee or fanam, Spink's NC. April 1976, 138-40

- Rebello, An unpublished issue of 1715 (Diu?), Spink's NC. April 1976, 143.

## Sohanlal Sisodiya, Study in a doubtful coin series of Haider Ali, Bangalore Numismatic Society Information sheet no.5.

Obtainable from the Bangalore NS, 15 first floor, B. V. K. Iyengar Road, Bangalore 560053.

2. Snartt, The rarity of East India Company coins, Seaby's C & M Bull. March 1976, 78-80. - Walker,  The Great Kushans and their coinage, World Coins, March 1976, 4-6; 10-11; 14; 16 (illus. maps).

The following papers on the coinage of Malwa were published in the Indore University Research Journal, IV, Oct. 1975.

This volume was devoted to numismatic papers referring to Malwa, on the occasion of the 63rd. Annual Conference of the

Numismatic Society of India held in Indore in October 1975.. Contact P. N. Kawthekar (Chairman, editorial board),

University of Indore or Dr. S. K. Bhatt, 115 Kailash Park, Manoramaganj, Indore 452001. - D. Bajpai, New excavated numismatic material bearing on the history of Malwa. - M. Shastri, Satavahana coins from Malwa: a review.

- K. Bhatt, A unique Indo-Greek coin from Malwa. - C. Jain, Early coins of Malwa,

Nisar Ahmed and R. K. Sethi, Some local silver punchmarked coins from Malwa,

- K. Dasgupta, Coins of the Malavas, - Handa, The smallest Malava coin,

- V. Trivedi, Two unique coins from Malwa, - N. Kawthekar, Origin of coins,

Far East - E. Beatty,  The top Boxer group -- Major General Adna R. Chafee, Medal Collector, Feb. 1976, 20-25 (illus.: China relief @ Expedition medals 1900). MC. from the Orders and Medals Soc. of America, 3828 Ronnald Dr. Philadelphia PA 19154 C.M. Nielsen, Emergency and Guerilla Currencies of North Luzon, Nueva Vizcaya, Bank Note Reporter, Feb. 1976, 3. BNR. from P.O. Box 9, Camden SC 29020. - H.  Phillips, Philippine coinage, the forgotten U.S. coinage, Numismatist vol 89, March 1976, 525-8 (illus.). R.N. J. Wright, Greenwood and Batley and the Tientsin Cash Mint of 1888, Spink's NC. April 1976, 146-7.

Books -  - Basso,  The Coins, Medals and Tokens of the Philippines, 2nd. edn. (from the author in Manilla).

- L. C. Gillilland, The Stone Money of Yap, a numismatic survey, Smithsonian Inst. Washington DC, 20402, 75 pp. (illus.) Stock no. 047-001-00122-2: 1.70 dollars.

- Farahbakhsh, Jranian Hammered Coinage, 900-1296 AH, 1500-1879 AD. (many illus.): from N. Farahbakhsh & sons,

Ave. Lalezar, Tehran, or from H. Farahbakhsh, Kanstr. 124, 1 Berlin 12, Germany; price £7-50. S.Tan, Coin and paper money catologue of Malaysia-Singapore-Brunei (1845 to date), International Stamp and Coin Agency, 18 Medan Pasar, 2nd. floor, Kuala Lumpur 01-20, Malaysia. (72 pp. illus. cat. with price list). £1-50

- C. Yang, Hong Kong catologue of coins and currency notes,  - C. Yang Stamps and Coins, 214 Ocean Terminal, P.O.Box 5565, Kowloon, Hong Kong (64 pp. illus.). 2 dollars.

Lists of Oriental Numismatic Books currently available can be obtained from:K, P. Bagchi & Co., 286B. B. Ganguly St., Calcutta 700012 Bharatiya Publishing House, B 9/45 Pilkhana, Sonarpura, Varanasi, India

India Book House, 744 West High Court Road, Dharampeth, Nagpur 440010, India

Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, Post Box 5715, 54 Rani Jhansi Road, New Delhi 110055
Numismatic Atheneum, 614. So. Johnson St. Iowa City, lowa 52240 Scott Semans, P.O. Box 2808, Cleveland, Ohio 44116 The Scott Semans' list (free to ONS members) includes a number of books not hitherto cited in our NLs. He would welcome additions to his list if anyone knows of available books he has not cited. The Indian booklists (& others not cited here) contain numerous reprints of standard works on Indian numismatics.

Other publication details World Coin News (lola WI 54945) will switch from bi-monthly to weekly with the May 4th. issue. It is published by C.L. Krause

(296). The Bank Note Reporter, a monthly tabloid, was recently sold by Grover Criswell (293) to A. M. Sheheen of Camden SC (P.O. Box 9, Camden SC 29020). The Judaic Syngraphic Collectors Association has been formed to "promote, stimulate and advance the study of Jewish syngraphics -- paper money of the Palestine mandate, Israel, Turkey before 1918, Egypt 1917-27, Jewish concentration camp and prisoner-of-war scrip etc'. Information from Kerry D. Erickson, 1181 Oakes Blvd. San Leandro CA 94577.